when we're looking at smoking versus
vaping vaping is probably worse in terms
of the damage to the airway and the
insulin resistance that comes from it
but this gets worse because we know that
insulin resistance is the core for most
chronic diseases that are killing us and
there's a handful of other lifestyle
habits that's contributing to it that's
horrifying so tell me everything Dr
Benjamin bman is a leading metabolic
scientist whose research focuses on the
hidden epidemic of insulin resistance
and its devastating consequences and by
regaining control of your insulin levels
he says you can regain control of your
life insulin is a hormone affects
literally every single cell of the body
but if those cells become insulin
resistant you start to spread the
disease for example they call
Alzheimer's insulin resistance of the
brain and even the most common forms of
infertility erectile dysfunction and
PCOS insulin resistance is a heavy
contributor now 88% of adults in the US
have some degree of insulin resistance
and people hear this and think America
is just fat and metabolically sick but
we're not actually the worst country
when it comes to this and part of it is
because of how different ethnicities
store fat I'll come back to that there's
two roads to insulin resistance so
there's the fast lane and I could make
you insulin resistant in 6 hours with
either of these common three things but
if I removed them your resistance would
go away just as quickly now the slow
lane that's a problem and there's
certain lifestyle habits and problems
with our diets that are massively
contributing to slow insulin resistance
now thankfully this can be resolved
through four pillars which are very
simple we'll get into that but why don't
we just sack all this off and just take
as EMP well because people may not know
about the negative side effects for
example 40% of the weight that people
are losing on these drugs is coming from
highly
I have been forced into a bet with my
team we're about to hit 10 million
subscribers on YouTube which is our
biggest Milestone ever thanks to all of
you and we want to have a massive party
for the people that have worked on this
show for years behind the scenes so they
said to me Steve for every new
subscriber we get in the next 30 days
can $1 be given to our celebration fund
for the entire team and I've agreed to
the bet so if you want to say thank you
to the team behind the scenes at di of
all you've got to do is hit the
subscribe button so actually this is the
first time I'm going to tell you not to
subscribe because it might end up
costing me an
[Applause]
[Music]
awful
Benjamin what is the mission that you're
on my mission is to help people
appreciate that much of chronic disease
we look at them as these siloed
individual distinct disorders with
totally distinct Origins and yet much of
them share a common core it's as if
their branches growing from the same
tree in the conventional clinical care
will look at these branches and give
someone a prescription for a medication
which is only going to prune the branch
back a little bit never actually solving
the problem it can just grow right back
and so we can look at
most of these chronic diseases that are
killing us globally and and then say
okay there are in fact some simple
lifestyle changes that can be
implemented that will help reduce the
risk of not only one or two but all of
the top killers from things like
Alzheimer's disease to uh heart disease
to type two diabetes to uh liver failure
fatty liver disease all of them share a
common metabolic core that's my mission
and what is that common metabolic core
yeah it's a little known problem called
insulin resistance in fact when I first
started this topic I stumbled on one
paper that documented how when fat
tissue is growing it increases the risk
of type two diabetes that was this
concept in the early 2000s that was
really getting a lot of attention
diabesity this kind of dual epidemic of
wherever we see obesity we see more type
two diabetes in this manuscript outlined
something that was to me a revelation at
the time it was so fascinating where
when fat tissue is growing it starts
releasing pro-inflammatory
proteins that inflammation caused a
problem called insulin resistance and
then that got me into this realm of
understanding that other tissues of the
body as they become insulin resistant
then you start to spread the chronic
disease and and
essentially coming to the conclusion
that something like hypertension high
blood pressure which is the most common
cardiovascular problem and the main
contributor to heart disease well
insulin resistance is the main cause of
hypertension um they call Alzheimer's
disease type 3 diabetes or more
accurately um insulin resistance of the
brain even the most common forms of
infertility in men it's erectile
dysfunction well that's because of
insulin resistance of the blood vessels
in women the most common form of
infertility is polycystic ovary syndrome
or PCOS that's because of the insulin
resistance affecting her ovaries and the
ability to produce the proper sex
hormones I guess the really important
question here is what is insulin
resistance and can you explain this to
me like I'm a 10-year-old oh yeah for
sure insulin resistance is it's kind of
a it's a disorder that has two parts
it's like a coin with two sides that as
much as we think of we we think of one
side just because we hear the word
insulin resistance but there's another
part to it that I need to that is very
important so insulin first of all is a
hormone that we make from the pancreas a
long kind of gland tucked underneath the
stomach and the pancreas is a very busy
organ it makes a lot of different
hormones it makes hormones that come
into the blood it also makes enzymes
that go into the into the intestines to
help digest food but among the hormones
that are being released into the blood
is insulin now in the person with type
one diabetes their immune system has
destroyed their beta cells so they don't
make insulin anymore that's why for a
person with type 1 diabetes insulin is a
life-saving therapy you're giving them
what they're not making anymore but for
everybody else we have beta cells and
they're releasing insulin when they need
to now usually the main
stimulus the main reason the beta cell
is releasing the insulin is because
blood glucose levels go up so I eat
sugar you eat sugar or not even
something as obvious as sugar but bread
or or crackers White chips oh yes yes so
basically anything that falls into the
family of a carbohydrate so if the Earth
grows it that's a carbohydrate um if
it's a plant it's a carbohydrate maybe
that's a better way of describing it and
so it's going to have starches and
sugars which all is kind of falls into
this family of carbohydrate depending on
how much starch or sugars that it has
then that will result in a bigger or
smaller blood glucose or blood sugar
response but then if blood sugar is too
high for too long that becomes very
harmful to the body so insulin comes in
um and helps lower the blood glucose and
then having done its job insulin comes
back down so insulin comes out like a
taxi and transports all the glucose in
my blood to various places around the
body to St perfect yeah tax that's right
that you can sit look at it's a shuttle
it's a taxi saying hey glucose come on
in I'm dropping you off at the muscle so
mostly just as an interesting tangent of
insulin before I finish answering
insulin resistance insulin will open the
doors for blood sugar to come in and
drive the taxi in mostly at the muscle
and the fat muscle and fat tissue need
insulin to come and bring the sugar in
Via taxi however other tissues and and
the brain a little bit as well other
tissues will still respond to insulin
but they don't need insulin to tell it
what to do with the sugar it just takes
it in but even on those like the liver
for example if the liver sees sugar
driving by in the taxi it just opens the
doors and lets it in it doesn't need
insulin to come and tell it to let the
sugar in however even at the liver and O
every other cell has a similar degree of
this the liver doesn't know what to do
with it so this is back to something I'd
mentioned earlier where insulin's
thematic effect at the entire body is to
tell the body what to do with energy in
all of its forms as as these kind of
caloric Rich molecules what to do with
lactate what to do with ketones what to
do with fats or glucose what to do with
Pro amino acids so insulin will tell the
body what to do with all of those things
but again its most famous effect is to
control blood sugar and that's not wrong
because its most powerful activator is
blood sugar so with all of that in mind
insulin resistance is two problems
wrapped into one the one problem is the
most obvious vious one which is that
insulin isn't working as well as it used
to so back to the analogy of the taxis
dropping off sugar if the muscle tissue
has become insulin resistant insulin is
coming and trying to pull the
sugar-loaded taxi into the muscle but
the muscle's not listening so say that
again so the yeah insulin's coming past
with the glucose inside it well not
technically yeah but just to sort of go
with your metaphor but maybe to use
another one insulin comes and knocks on
the doors it's like the bouncer yeah at
the door it's coming and knocking on the
door of the muscle saying hey muscle
I've got some sugar that wants to come
in and normally the muscle will say oh
yeah sure okay open it up the doors and
let the sugar come in when the muscle is
insulin resistant the bouncers is
knocking maybe there's even I'm almost
getting ahead of myself but one bouncer
maybe two or three bouncers pounding on
the doors of the muscle cell but the
muscle cell is not listening it's become
deaf that's the insulin resistance of
what we call insulin resistance where
some of insulin's effects like helping
lower blood sugar it's not working very
well anymore and the muscle is just an
obvious example because there's so much
of it you know it is the biggest tissue
on the average individual someone who's
very obese perhaps now has more fat
tissue but even people who are
overweight most of us is muscle so
that's a good it's a good tissue to look
at so part of insulin resistance is that
of all the things insulin is trying to
do including including lower blood sugar
it doesn't do it quite as well as it
used to some of the cells or tissues of
the body have become deaf to insulin's
demands now however at the same time
that's happening insulin levels are
higher and that is really important um
and I'll I'll mention an example in just
a moment that highlights the difference
between the two but we have to consider
anytime we talk about insulin resistance
we think of two things happening um in
concert one insulin isn't working quite
as well as it used to in various places
of the body at the same time insulin
levels are higher and that kind of takes
us back to the um the muscle cell where
I'd mentioned getting a little ahead of
myself that a bouncer is knocking on the
door and Once Upon a Time the muscle
cell would hear that one polite knock
from that one bouncer or one molecule of
insulin if you will and it would open
the door and let the glucose or the
blood sugar come in but now the muscle
cell um the the the bouncer insulin's
knocking on the door but the muscle
doesn't listen it's resistant and so the
body has adapted and it learns okay well
if one bouncer wasn't enough let's send
an angry mob of bouncers and then the
glucose the muscle will start to open
the door and and and indeed it can so
those two problems go together on one
hand insulin isn't working as well as it
used to that's what gives it the name
insulin resistance but there's another
part that is equally present which is
that blood insulin levels are higher now
there's um earlier at the outset of the
conversation I mentioned that even
infertility has an origin sh has some
degree of um development because of
insulin resistance and it's a perfect
example of both of these parts of
insulin resistance where in some
instances insulin isn't working very
well always with insulin resistance
blood insulin levels are higher so for
example erect stle dysfunction is the
most common form of male infertility in
fact its connection to insulin
resistance is so strong that just a few
years ago I I was so struck by a title
of a paper that had just been published
which stated something like is erectile
dysfunction the earliest manifestation
of insulin resistance in otherwise young
healthy men now what is the connection
it's because in a normal erectile
function in order for the man to have
normal erectile function he has to
experience a pretty dramatic increase in
the size of the blood vessels in his
body the blood vessels expand that
increases blood flow and then he has
normal function part of that signal that
tells the blood vessels that it's time
to expand is actually insulin and so
this is what I said earlier where
insulin does so many things in the body
and we only think of it as being
relevant to glucose and that's not fair
insulin does a lot of stuff again
including telling blood vessels to
expand
now unfortunately in the case of this un
this unfortunate man his blood vessels
become insulin resistant so now it's
insulin coming and knocking on the doors
of the blood vessel saying hey it's time
to expand and increase blood flow but
the blood vessels don't respond they
don't listen so they stay constricted
blood flow stays insufficient and thus
he has a rectile dysfunction no I don't
want to be insulin resistant no no one
does no one does so so tell me how it
happens yeah right yeah so the origins
are so important because it helps us
understand why we've gotten into this
situation we are where it's the most
common problem worldwide there are two
Pathways to insulin resistance so uh two
two roads that get to the same
destination again the destination being
insulin resistance there's the fast lane
which I call fast insulin resistance and
it actually has three lanes which I'll
describe in a moment then there's the
slow insulin resistance which is a more
it takes a little longer get there but
at the same time it takes a little
longer to get away from it so I'll start
with fast insulin resistance because the
slow one ends up getting a little
excitingly complicated but in a cool way
so with fast insulin resistance there
are three things that I could take you
to a clinical lab and I could make you
insulin resistant in six hours with
either of these three things but as
quickly as it settles in if I remove
those things your insulin resistance
would go away so so these are fast
causes and they're fast resolution they
are stress is uh is a primary cause of
fast insulin resistance SO2 is
inflammation and then lastly and this is
going to sound somewhat paradoxical too
much insulin is also a cause and I'll
end with that one because I think it's
the most important then transition to
slow insulin resistance so anytime the
body is experiencing too much stress it
will very quickly become insulin resist
istent now as a professor who teaches
Endocrinology no surprise I Define
stress in the context of hormones and
there are two primary stress hormones
cortisol and what we call in the US
epinephrine or in the UK adrenaline
those are the two stress hormones now
those hormones are very distinct they
have almost nothing in common but like
when you are feeling a little stressed
it's both of those especially adrenaline
epinephrine that are making you feel a
little jittery it's making your
heartbeat a little faster you're a
little more alert um that all starts to
play into a stress response but what
those two hormones have in common is
that they both want blood glucose levels
to climb it's kind of their way of
saying hey we don't really know what's
going on right now but we want to be
ready to run away or to that's the fight
ORF flight kind of aspect to stress and
so they want to push blood glucose
levels up and they do very well that of
course puts them at odds with the
hormone insulin cuz these two
epinephrine or adrenaline and cortisol
the two stress hormones they're pushing
glucose up insulin wants to push it down
so the more the body is has those stress
hormones elevated because of say sleep
deprivation that's a very effective way
to increase cortisol or they are taking
too much drinking too much caffeine that
is a way to increase epinephrine quite
strongly if both of those signals are
too incess or you know they continue to
be present and climb then insulin has to
work harder and harder and then we have
insulin resistance so stress is a cause
of insulin resistance but then next is
inflammation you you know you and I were
commenting about earlier about how boy
there's a cold going around people it's
flu season even then if a person were
wearing a continuous glucose monitor on
the back of their arm measuring their
glucose levels they would see their
glucose levels are much much higher like
significantly higher during the time
that they're struggling with this
infection that is a reflection of
insulin resistance insulin's having a
harder time keeping the blood glucose
levels in
check anytime inflammation is up insulin
resistance will be up as well even in
things like autoimmune diseases there
are reports in humans that document the
degree to which someone has say active
rheumatoid arthritis their their joints
are achy because of of an autoimmune
attacking of the joints they will note
on some days like every autoimmune
disease there is an EB and a flow some
days it's good some days it's bad and on
the bad days if you measure their
insulin resistance it is absolutely
locked with the degree to which their
immune system is turned on or off or
higher or lower so inflammation is
another cause and then the last one of
the Fast Lane of insulin resistance is
too much insulin itself now the astute
listener will realize the kind of
circular thing I've just presented by
invoking high insulin as a cause of
insulin resistance because they will
also think but wait a minute Ben you
just said that high insulin is also a
consequence of insulin resistance that
you know back to the bouncer knocking on
the the the door of the muscle cell if
one bouncer wasn't enough or one
molecule of insulin wasn't enough the
body will say okay well let's send 10
molecules of insulin so High insulin is
both a consequence of insulin resistance
but it's also a cause and this is
reflective of a fundamental principle in
all of
biology that if there is too much of a
stimulus a cell if it's capable will try
to become resistant to that stimulus
this would be like a funny analogy of in
in in my in the bikman home my darling
wife is home with the children that is
what she wants to do she she is
full-time mom when I'm home and I try to
be home as much as I can it's funny for
me to note the difference in how quickly
we each respond to our children I will
hear my child saying mom mom mom and
she's not responding mom has heard this
for so much that she's become kind of
selectively deaf to when my children are
demanding her attention I'm not as
around my children quite as much because
I'm working during the day and so when I
hear that it's a very fresh signal to me
I've not heard it so much that I've
become deaf to it and so I will respond
even though I'm in the other room
because I'm so much more sensitive to
the clamoring for attention this is like
the body in response to insulin if there
is always insulin it's always going up
always going up the body will start to
say the muscle cell will start to say
boy insulin you are knocking on my door
all the time this is getting old I'm not
responding anymore I'm not going to
listen as much as I was before so in
that sense insulin too much insulin
becomes a cause of insulin resistance
and back to what I said earlier I could
take you into the lab start infusing you
with just a little drip of insulin to
increase your insulin and over just a
few hours you would become demonstrably
less sensitive to it than you were
before we started but again as I take
that away give your body a few hours and
it's back to normal in every one of
those instances it's a fast onset and
it's also a fast solution if we can take
it away if we can take it away but if we
can't take it away does it become sort
of chronic yeah so that especially all
of these can contribute to a more
lingering insulin resistance but
especially insulin where I focus on that
one the most because of not only its
relevance to the slow lane but also just
how present it is where 70% of all
calories globally are carbohydrates and
now perhaps with the best of intentions
our experts are telling us that we
should be eating six times a day and so
we eat we wake up in the morning insulin
has finally been coming down while we've
been fasting overnight insulin gets to
take a little bit of a break we're
fasting then we break that fast by
eating breakfast and in the UK as it is
in the US by and large this is going to
be a very starchy sugary breakfast it's
toast with some Jam or it's cereal or
it's Bagels that is going to be that is
almost pure glucose and so what do we do
we wake up we eat breakfast we Spike our
blood sugar levels and Insulin has to
come up insulin will take longer to come
down than the blood sugar will it will
wait in the blood to make sure that all
the blood sugar has gone back to normal
so depending on how much carbohydrate we
ate for breakfast it could take our
insulin levels three or even four hours
to come back down to normal long before
it's had a chance to come back down to
normal we've had a midm morning snack of
course we need to go get a sugar coffee
and another Bagel or something and so
after just a couple hours we do it again
and once again before insulin has had a
chance to come back down we have a
starchy carbohydrate heavy lunch then an
afternoon snack and then a carbohydrate
heavy dinner and then of course we have
to have an evening snack before we go to
bed so the average individual is
spending every waking moment in a state
of elevated insulin and thus the signal
never really goes away because they they
never give themselves a break but one of
the consequences of that I mentioned
which is that it directly causes insulin
resistance but when insulin is high it
starts to have a signal on the fat cell
and that then brings us to the slow
insulin resistance where you have
something happening in the fat tissue
that begins to set the stage for insulin
resistance in the entire body and it
takes longer to settle in but it takes
also longer to go away that's why I call
this one slow insulin resistance now in
the case of insulin most people so the
the the the key with the yeah I'll
explain it this way first so the most
relevant feature with fat tissue
contributing to insulin resistance is
the size of each fat cell when we
typically think of fat we would maybe
say okay Steve has um I'll do this in
kilos for the UK audience Steve has 10
kilos of fat on your entire body that's
probably too much for you Ben has 20
kilos and yet it's possible that I'm
healthier metabolically than you um and
that's because it's not the mass of fat
that matters most it's the size of the
fat cell that matters this is why women
despite universally being fatter than
her male counterparts are healthier with
regards to insulin resistance and every
single metabolic problem it's because
women as a result of her particular sex
hormones have more fat cells but they're
smaller so she has more fat but smaller
fat cells and small fat cells are
healthy insulin sensitive
anti-inflammatory fat cells but the
bigger the fat cell gets the more it
initiates a Cascade of events or a
series of events that creates insulin
resistance and am I right in thinking we
have the same amount of fat cells for
our whole life pretty much that's a
really really safe assumption for most
people yeah for most people the a fat
cell um sometimes students will hear
that fat cells are Immortal that is not
true but they're longlived fat cells
will live about 10 years and so
typically by the time if you think of if
you look at a newborn during infancy
childhood and puberty the number of fat
cells is going up up up up up once they
finish puberty so mid to late teens for
a young woman late teens or even early
20s for a young man usually at that
point the number of fat cells they have
is going to be very static this is
something people don't really understand
and I actually discovered it from during
this podcast and speaking to so many
experts about this that that we pretty
much especially as an adult have the
same amount of fat cells really
regardless of what we eat yes and it's
actually just the fat cells we have
shrinking or grow expanding exactly
that's exactly right now there are
differences across which by the way
makes lipos suction a pretty bad
idea in fact it in fact it makes things
worse please let's make sure we come
back to that okay I'll write down lip
because it really becomes the person
ends up their vanity ends up really
ruining their their their future
metabolic outcomes but there are
differences across ethnicity like um
this is a little oversimplified but not
much on one end you'd have Caucasians
kind of northern European Caucasians on
the other one end you'd have East Asians
like uh Chinese Japanese uh Korean East
Asians and and then if you look at that
same spectrum of people making fat cells
through their life an East Asian will be
making fat cells and then stop right
about here about sort of so very few fat
cells relatively speaking across all the
ethnicities they have very few fat cells
a Caucasian on the other end of the
spectrum they went way higher and so
this guy let's say American Ben versus
Chinese Ben overly simplified but but
here we are um so much of fat Mass isn't
the number of fat cells even though
American Ben has more it's the size of
the fat cell so I could be the same
percent body fat really as Chinese knees
Ben um but that would just be because my
fat cells were just that much smaller
but this is the problem then if you have
let's say American Ben and Chinese Ben
both gained 10 kilos of pure fat over
the next 10 years very easily done most
people do that quite
often Caucasian Ben just doesn't look as
good in his Speedo um which is a pasty
Caucasian he's not going to look
particularly good in that Speedo anyway
but I just am bulging a little more than
I was before but otherwise I'm healthy
my blood pressure is fine my blood sugar
is fine everything's normal put that
same 10 kilos of fat on Chinese Ben
hypertension type 2 diabetes fatty liver
disease infertility um and that is
because Chinese Ben had fewer fat cells
to start with and so those fat cells as
the body was told to store fat those fat
cells were getting much much bigger much
sooner and the fat fat cell promotes
insulin resistance
very very readily and so that logically
moves into this the question of what
makes fat cells grow and it is two
essential variables that we only ever
look at calories and yet if you take a
person with type 1 diabetes and say I
want you to eat 10,000 calories but
don't give yourself your insulin
injection they cannot gain weight it is
it is literally impossible for the type
1 diabetic to get fat if they are
skipping their insulin injections in
fact this is so known that if you take
let's imagine a young woman who would
maybe have more pressure to be thin than
her male counterpart although it's
happening more in males too imagine a
young girl who gets diagnosed with type
1 diabetes at the age of 13 or 14 very
impressionable time she's very worried
about how how she looks and how thin she
is she learns that wait a minute I can
eat whatever I want and all I have to do
is not eject my insulin and I'll be as
skinny as I want and it works it works
so well that it's actually a formal
eating disorder called
diabulimia so this the fact that this
exists is absolute proof that the
growing and the shrinking of the fat
cell is more complicated than just
calories being high or low because like
i' said earlier when I talked about
hormones hormones are a way for the B
for the very tissues of the body to know
what it ought to do with energy and so a
fat cell will have energy all around it
and if it doesn't have insulin to tell
it what to do it won't do anything with
it or maybe to make this more direct
back home in my lab my students my
students are growing fat cells in Petri
dishes these fat cells are swimming in a
little sea of calories lots of glucose
lots of fats and yet they stay really
small until we add insulin the moment we
add insulin into that little petri dish
if we check those cells four hours later
they're immediately fatter if we check
them 4 hours later they're fatter still
now they know what to do with the energy
they have so with slow insulin
resistance it develops when fat cells
get really really big it's like a a
because they have to tell insulin
insulin you continue you you are telling
me to keep growing I can't keep growing
I'm so big that I'm going to pop I mean
literally the fat cell can get so big
that it degrades its membrane it's like
a water balloon that a naughty little
boy has overfilled and it's about to
burst the fat cell doesn't want to burst
and so it tells insulin insulin you are
trying to make me grow you're telling me
to grow I can't listen anymore I'm
becoming insulin resistant to stop
growing so insulin makes you fat oh very
much now if you so so a moment ago I
said that the big fat cell is two
variables you must have both you must
have both a signal to tell the fat cell
to get big which is insulin it is the
there's no other signal that can do it
you can in a human just simply take away
the insulin like type 1 diabetes it
doesn't matter any other hormone in the
body it does not matter they cannot get
fat they could again they can eat
thousand they could eat 10,000 calories
of chocolate cake they cannot get fat
not only can they not get fat they can't
hold on to their fat because if there's
no insulin to tell the Fat Self to hold
on to it or get big it has to shrink
it's breaking down its fat so the body
goes into such a dramatic fat burning
state in the absence of insulin that
keeping fat fat becomes impossible so
the insulin signal is necessary to tell
the fat cell what to do but the fat cell
will say Okay insulin you're high you're
telling me to grow but what am I going
to grow with that's where the calories
come in now the fat cell will say hey
fats and glucose in the blood insulin
has told me to get big and so I need to
pull you in to help me grow you're going
to give me the bulk and if you have one
without the other it is death so if I'm
in 2,000 calories and I have a different
insulin sensitivity to you so we both
eat 2,000 calories and I'm insulin
resistant doesn't that mean that I will
you'll store more as fat oh okay yeah
yeah so so your body now it would partly
depend on there are people where you you
if your if all of your fat cells had
reached its maximum point then you're
done you're not going to gain more fat
you're just going to become more and
more and more insulin resistant okay
fine so you kind of start limiting
yourself but there are studies in humans
to show that if you give humans
isocaloric D meals so the exact same
number of calories but they in the same
amount of protein but you differ those
meals based on the amount of carbs to
the amount of fat so let's say two meals
exact same calories 2,000 calories or
that's in one meal that's too high a
th000 calories in one meal one version
of this is the conventional way of
eating which is lower fat higher carb
the other meal same number of calories
but it's lower carb higher
fat this lower carb higher fat version
will have a lower insulin
response and they they will store less
fat from that meal they're met and
someone would say well where do the
calories go you can't this it's the laws
of thermodynamics you can't destroy
energy the metabolic rate will go up so
when insulin is low if you have someone
going a full day
eating the same number of calories but
lower carb calories their metabolic rate
will be almost 300 calories higher in
that day a metabolic rate is the yeah
that's the total amount of energy that
it just costs you and I to just live
okay you RIS going through the day but
that's but that's a significant amount
like if you and I were to go exercise
and say let's go burn 300 calories we
got to be on the stair stepper for an
hour or something so it's 300 calories
but at the same time if your insulin is
low you're burning so much fat that
start making ketones and I I don't
intend to get onto that topic quite yet
but suffice it to say every molecule of
a ketone has a has a caloric load
roughly similar to glucose and one of
the and and what the body when it starts
making a lot of ketones it starts
eliminating the ketones so every time
someone is breathing out ketones they're
literally breathing out calories or
they're urinating and they're urinating
out ketones if they have higher ketones
in their blood they're urinating out
calories because ketones have energy and
so this is the way that if insulin is
low it becomes impossible for the body
to hold on to its energy it is so
determined to spend energy that it will
both increase metabolic rate and it will
make the energy the calories be wasted
in the breath and in the urine and in
the form of ketones because ketones have
calories ketones are energy now we're
just dumping them out into the universe
it's worth before we talk about how to
keep my
levels low so that I can benefit from
all the health benefits we've talked
about it's probably also worth just
spending a little bit of time trying to
understand the evolutionary basis of
insulin resistance there are some
theories that are very interesting that
attempt to explain why is it that we
became so fantastically different from
let's say our closest animal relatives
other primates like chimpanzees or or
Apes what was the difference that had us
become so different than them one of the
leading theories is a is a Theory called
the expensive tissue hypothesis and it
actually does have something to do with
ketones in the expensive tissue
hypothesis as the theory goes our
earlier ancestors deviated in this kind
of animal family line because we started
eating more meat we started eating food
that was so nutritious so nutrient-dense
so loaded with good calories and all of
the fats and proteins that we need that
it allowed two very distinct changes to
occur in US compared to other primates
one our intestines became significantly
shorter so if you compare the human
digestive tract to any other primate
animal if we are a primate um then if
you look at the intestines they're
fantastically different particularly the
large intestine or the colon because our
ancestors as the theory goes began
eating meat we didn't need the colon as
much um because the colon is a place for
food to ferment and so if you're eating
a lot of plant matter like other
primates do you need a much much larger
colon so we started eating food that was
so nutrient-dense our colon shrunk
considerably we didn't need to waste
energy on a big busy colon at the same
time as we were eating food that was so
nutrient dense and so loaded with good
fat it allowed us to have more time to
be curious and explore and so at the
same time our int in were shrinking
because we didn't need them to be so big
our brain was growing and it's because
it had so much nutrition including
ketones so ketones are an extraordinary
fuel for the brain in fact one of the
reasons why a baby that is born
premature will be more likely to have
learning disorders later in life is
because premature baby didn't have time
to get very fat and fat baby is healthy
baby and fat baby gets into ketosis
let's say you and I were to fast
straight for 2 days if you took a
six-month old baby that baby would be in
a deeper state of ketosis in two hours
than you and I would be in two days
because the baby is burning so much of
its beautiful chubby fat and the more
the body burns fat the more it makes
ketones and the tissue of the body that
appears to benefit the
most in response to ketones is the brain
the brain the moment ketones hit the
blood stream the brain immediately
starts taking in ketones for a fuel very
often I have students who have had a
professor perhaps with the best of
intentions but ignorant nonetheless tell
the student that the brain the main fuel
for the brain is glucose that the brain
prefers glucose and I show them just one
or two papers to prove that wrong
immediately and it is reflected in in in
this idea which if if to use some
convenient UK units if blood glucose is
5 Millar that's a concentration a way of
measuring an amount of of something
blood glucose may be 5 Millar or 80
milligram per deciliter for the American
audience um that would be a normal
glucose and if you and I were to fast
for 24 or so hours we may get up to
about one Millar of of ketones and yet
even then the brain has already switched
to get the majority of its energy from
the Ketone and so don't tell me that in
this Dynamic the brain prefers this one
because this one's five times higher
than this one and even in that scenario
the brain is already getting more than
half of its energy from the Ketone so
all of this is my long-winded way of
saying when we look at the principles of
evolution one of the leading theories is
this idea that we began eating
essentially a meat heavy diet that again
is so nutritious that it allowed our
brain brains to grow maybe one final
point on this although it is a bit of a
barbed comment people may find this
somewhat amusing or disappointing or
frustrating the title of a book just
published which is that vegetarians have
smaller brains this is seen in humans
that the less a human eats meat then the
smaller the brain becomes the brain is
so dependent on the nutrient density
that comes from animal sourced foods
that it will suffer um when it doesn't
get
them interesting I mean that's a
controversial thing to say it is and you
can cut it out but it really is it's a
real thing and why does depression go up
so much when people stop eating animal
Source Foods it's because you are
depriving the brain of what it needs
what is it exactly you're depriving the
brain of in that situation yeah yeah so
at least among other things at least it
would be the the essential omega-3 fats
so there are three Omega-3s and you
humans can only we can only get one from
Plants but it's one that the humans
don't use we need the other two and they
only come from animal Source foods and
you could supplement absolutely right
and yeah you can but but that that so
the the solution in that regard is the
vegan must be educated enough to know
what they're deficient in and then
wealthy enough to afford the supplements
to make up for it so is that the the
only evolutionary sort of hypothesis
towards why we developed this insulin
resistance oh yeah in fact it's funny
that you bring the question up again
because I realized I didn't quite answer
it that way so insulin resistance why
would it exist at all it would probably
be a way for the body to know when it
was needed to hold on to energy a little
better so now I say that now and and
someone would think well but you just
why would I want to hold on to energy in
a way where it's causing hypertension
and Alzheimer's disease and increasing
the risk of heart disease not all
versions of insulin resistance are
negative so there is um there is what
all the insulin resistance that you and
I have been talking about is
pathological insulin resistance or
harmful insulin resistance insulin
resistance that serves no good purpose
and it's making us sick however there is
insulin resistance in human development
which is physiological or helpful it's
supposed to happen and that is the two
PS of physiological insulin resistance
puberty and pregnancy because in both of
those instances as we outlined earlier
when the body's insulin resistant
insulin is high that's not always bad
because insulin wants things to grow it
is like a fertilizer in the body now
sometimes it's misplaced and results in
problems like increasing the risk of
cancer for example but in other
instances if you have a young child who
needs some explosive growth during
puberty well then that's really helpful
insulin's telling the body to store more
energy to build up tissues including
muscle and bone but also including fat
so in pregnancy insulin's playing a role
in growing the placenta sure is the
breasts yes so in the woman after she's
finished puberty the only other time of
growth she'll never have will be
pregnancy and and so those are the two
instances where the body has become
insulin resistant to take advantage of
the heightened scenario where it can
grow because the woman's body needs to
more fat goodness yes yes so her body
not only needs to grow tissue Mass like
the uterus has to get much bigger she
has to grow a placenta she also needs to
become a little insulin resistant to
give a little more glucose to her baby
because she is after all now living for
two people and so as as her body becomes
insulin resistant actually facilitates
the growth of the baby a little more
rapidly but as you noted it helps her
store more fat and progesterone is
another hormone that even accelerates
that process but basically it's her way
of her body's way of saying hey I am
committing to Growing another human and
it's going to be metabolically very
demanding and so I'm going to have as
much extra fat or much as much extra
energy as I can in order to ensure that
if there's any sort of scarcity in food
that happens during the course of the
pregnancy I'll have enough energy to get
through it all and then maybe I'll even
have enough to continue to feed the baby
with lactation after the baby's born
what is gestational diabetes yeah it's a
great question gestational diabetes is
essentially type 2 diabetes of pregnancy
so it's perfectly timed question because
if you look at the average woman um who
is very healthy very insulin sensitive
at the beginning of her pregnancy
so glucose is normal and insulin is
normal over the course of her pregnancy
she stays normal healthy pregnant woman
which is to say she has physiological
insulin resistance she doesn't get
diagnosed with gestational diabetes
though which means her glucose is normal
but to keep her glucose normal because
she is insulin resistant but for a
purpose to help her body grow her
insulin levels are high and then the
glucose is still in a normal range and
then in some women especially if she has
a family history of type two diabetes
the insulin resistance goes too far now
she has high insulin like all pregnant
women do but she's not able to keep her
glucose levels in check so if I'm eating
loads and loads of sugar throughout a
pregnancy that will compound the problem
absolutely so then she will go from the
normal insulin resistance of pregnancy
into the insulin resistance of diabetes
so it really is like type 2 diabetes but
a microcosm of it a mini verion
that was really instigated or initiated
because of the pregnancy combined with a
bit of a genetic predisposition combined
with her eating the worst possible way
does that then impact the future baby oh
for sure it does yeah so think about
it's almost like the baby is devel
literally developing in a hyperglycemic
hyperinsulinemic environment so the
baby's get the baby gets
hardwired to want to continue to exist
in a state of high insulin and high
glucose after the baby is born and so so
yes The Offspring of mothers who have
gestational diabetes are significantly
more likely to gain weight and be
chubbier or fatter than their
counterparts and to later develop type
two diabetes yeah a resounding yes I
read in your book that these infants
have a
40% higher chance to be obese and have
metabolic complications in their teenage
years and Beyond yes I mean a
significant thing and I I say that with
all of the sympathy I can for the mother
who may be struggling with this but it
is certainly a motivation for Mom to
just be mindful of what you're eating
one of the things that that I saw the
other day on social media which I wanted
to ask you about was this I got a
picture of it here um it was someone
online that posted this photo and they
said well this graph and they said we
need to figure out what's going on here
um this is the graph I'll put it on
screen for anybody that's watching but
also it'll be linked in the comment
section below um it essentially shows
that over the last let's say 20 20 years
there's been a really significant rise
in cancer amongst women but when we look
at cancer amongst men it's pretty flat
MH um and this is cancer incidence by
age and gender up to 49 years old and I
was wondering if you had any thoughts on
why this is happening yeah yeah yeah a
few thoughts come to mind um whenever I
see these kinds of reports I always make
sure I look firstly at the what are they
actually measuring so just to set the
stage this is the number of women who
are being diagnosed with cancer so not
dying from cancer but it's going up so
one one simple explanation although
perhaps the most disappointing could be
that more women are going in for testing
younger and so we're just seeing kind of
an artifact of more women are just going
in sooner and they're detecting a
problem that they wouldn't have
otherwise detected you know for 10 or 20
years which is a good thing you want to
detect cancer as soon as possible so
that's the boring answer that it could
be a reflection of just more women going
in for ultrasounds or MRIs or mamory
scans whereas men don't ever get tested
for anything which is why we die more
from everything possibly but to give a
more exciting answer this is very very
likely almost entirely driven by breast
cancer um breast cancer is the main
cancer for women um by far and so if I
had to guess I bet almost all of this
increase in cancer incidents is because
of breast cancer why might that be going
up I would suggest there's probably a
couple instances one um although people
might not appreciate this is that one of
the best ways for a woman to reduce her
risk of breast cancer is actually having
babies it's very well known um very well
documented that if a woman um has a f
has babies and breastfeeds her risk of
um breast cancer goes down so yeah in
fact it's very meaningful I actually
don't know um the reasons for it it
could be the changes in estrogens during
lactation phase I've just I've just
actually done a quick search here to I
put a picture of that graph into Ai and
asked it the same question and it said
pretty much what you said it said
there's a rising breast cancer incidents
according to cancer research UK the
other one that it came up with is
obesity Trends oh yeah I promised I was
going to talk about that I wouldn't
leave that sorry for interrupting there
no no no problem and then the other one
was delayed childbearing that's what I'm
saying which is what you were saying
yeah so as child rates as child birth
rates are going down it does increase
the risk of breast cancer now as I'm a
cell biologist right I like to
understand a direct mechanism and so as
much as I invoke the perhaps lower rates
of child birth among women I don't know
the mechanism so I'm sort of loathe to
describe it the mechanisms I'm very
familiar with are the metabolic um which
is if you take a breast tissue that is
tumor tissue and compare it to like if
you take a breast tumor and compare it
to the normal tissue right next to it
like that it would have shared its
Origins with the cancer from the breast
will have seven times more insulin
receptors than the normal breast tissue
so the idea of this tracking quite
nicely with obesity rates going up over
the past 20 years I wouldn't say that
it's the Obesity per se but I would say
it's the entire metabolic milu which is
the insulin resistance that as much as
the high insulin is promoting fat cells
getting bigger that high insulin is also
accelerating the growth of the tumor
cells because again the main one of the
main mutations in breast cancer is a
Sevenfold so a seven times increase in
the number of insulin receptors and
Insulin wants to tell things to grow so
it's no surprise that almost every tumor
that's ever been measured for having
insulin receptors will have a lot more
it's basically telling its neighboring
cells insulin's going to come by and
it's going to tell us all to grow I want
to grow more than you and that's what
cancer is cancer is growth unregulated
growth insulin tells things to grow so
the connection between obesity with the
rising incidence of breast cancer is
very very likely a consequence of the
rising incidence of insulin resistance
as you guys know whoop is one of my show
sponsors it's also a company that I have
invested in and it's one that you guys
asked me about a lot the biggest
question I get asked is why I use whoop
over other warable technology options
and there is a bunch of reasons but I
think it really comes down to the most
overlooked yet crucial feature it's
noninvasive nature when everything in
life seems to be competing for my
attention I turn to whoop because it
doesn't have a screen and will armed the
CEO who came on this podcast told me the
reason that there's no screen because
screens equal distraction so when I'm in
meetings or I'm at the gym my whoop
doesn't demand my attention it's there
in the background constantly pulling
data and insights from my body that are
ready for when I need them if you've
been thinking about joining whoop you
can head to join. woop.com
CEO and try whoop for 30 days risk-free
and zero commitment that's join.
whoop.com CEO
let me know how you get
on you know one of the big subjects you
touched on at the start was the was
Alzheimer's and Dementia yes and I have
heard several people on this podcast
tell me that they think of Alzheimer's
as type three
diabetes worldwide there is a new case
of dementia every 3.2
seconds um it seems like I don't know if
this is true but is Alzheimer's and
Dementia On The Rise oh yes yeah it is
in fact it went from not being even on
the radar to being a top 10 killer um
now it's interesting how people even die
from Alzheimer's disease it's a very
kind of vague death but yeah Alzheimer's
disease is one of the top 10 diseases
now um certainly in the west um and and
I would argue it's because it has a
metabolic orgin now one of the
interesting things about Alzheimer's
disease is we have
spent billions of dollars on Alzheimer's
research trying to identify the the
plaque so so just to set the stage here
so that people listening can appreciate
this this paradigm shift that's occurred
in Alzheimer's research originally and
even in many people still people thought
that Alzheimer's disease is the result
of these plaques accumulating in the
brain these kind of little proteinous
little thick things that are preventing
neurons from sending the signals
throughout the brain for the brain to
think and and and have normal cognition
and and yet there are those of us and I
am proud to say I have long been one of
them who has said that the plaque based
Theory doesn't make sense we have had
drugs that have been available for human
use for years that have effectively
reduced plaques in the brain and yet did
nothing to improve cognition so that is
an immediate challenge of the plaque
based theory of Alzheimer's even further
even Beyond older than that evidence
when you would look postmortem or look
at tissue donor people who passed away
you would look at the brains of people
who died with confirmed Alzheimer's
disease at the time of death and look at
the brain of someone who died without
any evidence of any cognitive decline or
any compromised thinking whatsoever and
you would be just as likely to find
plaques in both brains so the so whether
the brain had Alzheimer's disease or not
you would still see plaques in the brain
so the whole idea that plaques mattered
has long been controversial and just to
put a fine point on it before
transitioning to the metabolic Origins
about two or 3 years ago they found out
that the very first published papers
that implicated plaque as a cause of
Alzheimer's disease were based on
fabricated data so the scientists who
published those first reports that led
to the entire theory that Alzheimer's
diseas is plaque based were called out
as fraudulent and and indeed all of it
was fabricated so the entire idea that
Alzheimer and and we have spent billions
of dollars on studies to try to how
determine how do plaques CA cause
Alzheimer's disease why when we reduce
plaques it doesn't appear to help the
disease because the plaques had nothing
to do with it that's just something that
some brains have some brains have more
of these little specks than other brains
and they don't contribute to Alzheimer's
disease at all now what did what kept
rising to the top and I would hope now
is the dominant theory is that people
with Alzheimer's disease almost always
have some detectable instance of insulin
resistance if not full-on diabetes type
two diabetes now I will say personally I
don't like the term type 3 diabetes
because it makes it sound like it's a
whole new version of diabetes to say it
more succinctly and accurately it is
simply insulin resistance of the brain
and the brain is a very hungry organ it
is in what I teach is is a tri a trinity
of high metabolic rate organs that there
are three organs in the body whose
metabolic rate is so high that that just
really sets it apart from everything
else and the brain is one of them the
brain has a very high metabolic rate so
this is a very hungry organ that needs a
lot of energy all the time but the brain
is unique in that it primarily will only
use two fuel sources and I've mentioned
them namely glucose and
ketones but glucose in that section of
the brain that gets compromised with
Alzheimer's disease the glucose can't
just come straight in it needs someone
to open the door for it and that is
insulin of course just like we described
with the muscle cell where in order for
the glucose to go into the muscle
insulin had to come and knock on the
door if you will and then the muscle
being a polite responsive host would
open and allow the glucose to come in
the brain is similar that in that
section of the brain it has doors that
need insulin it's locked until insulin
comes and opens them so even though
glucose levels may be high in the blood
like in type 2 diabetes you would think
well the brain can just get all the
glucose it wants and yet it cannot
because it has insulin regulating the
entrance of the glucose and if the brain
is insulin resistant there's not enough
glucose coming in and thus the brain is
forced to rely on the only other fuel
that it can rely on namely ketones but
the same person who's eating all the
time to keep their blood glucose high
all the time has so much insulin in
their blood that they're never making
enough ketones to fill the Gap you know
and mind the gap in the brain brain has
an energy gap now and and where where
the brain needs you know an amount of
energy I'm kind of acting it out for
those that are watching but the brain
has a certain energy demand that it
needs and if there's a lot of glucose in
a healthy insulin sensitive person
glucose will fill all of that need but
as the brain becomes progressively
insulin resistant it cannot get all of
its energy from glucose and thus there's
an energetic Gap and in the absence of
ketones there's nothing to fill that Gap
and the Brain says well I don't have
enough energy to keep functioning as
well as I did before so I have to reduce
my function which manifests as a
reduction in the ability to think and
process in other words cognition goes
down what's so interesting is I just got
finished describing a scenario that
scientists refer to as brain glucose
hypometabolism or a reduction in the
amount of glucose the brain is using
there are scientists that measured this
we don't in my lab because we don't do
these kinds of techniques but you can
actually Infuse people with the glucose
that you can take pictures of and see
how much the brain is taking it in and
metabolizing it in Alzheimer's disease
the brain is not getting as much glucose
so they call that a hypo or reduction in
metabolism of glucose and as much as you
and I are describing that scenario as
relevant for Alzheimer's disease you can
essentially open up the book of
neurological disorders and see the same
thing depression has a brain glucose
hypom metabolism to it my migraines have
a brain glucose hypom metabolism
epilepsy um and Parkinson's disease so
all of these disorders of the brain of
the central nervous system the one thing
they all have in common is the brain
isn't getting enough energy from
glucose and another way of saying that
is the one thing all of those seemingly
unrelated brain problems have in common
is that they all have some degree of
insulin resistance but then it's no
surprise that they all benefit when
ketones can swoop in to save the day
um but that only can happen if the
person is giving their body a break from
the insulin long enough to actually
start making
ketones really really interesting on
this point of Alzheimer's because I
don't think people have spent enough
time talking about the link between
insulin resistance and Alzheimer's um
and one of the things I was I was
looking at there was how many people
with Alzheimer's have meet the criteria
for insulin resistance and some Studies
have it at 4% there's a study I found
here that has it at 70 to
80% um which I wanted to site
um exact percentages vary but one
example is a study in the Journal of
Neurology in 2011 that found insulin
resistance at approximately 40% of
individuals with Alzheimer's um but
another study in Alzheimer's patients
sometimes found it to be as high as 70
or 80% for instance research by Dr
Suzanne Damon M at Brown University has
drawn attention to the concept of type
three free
diabetes yeah again I don't love the
term but I appreciate the use of it
which is it does suggest a metabolic
origin but even you look at those ranges
Stephen you'd say well one was 40 one
was 80 boy what a difference I suspect a
lot of that is just how did they measure
insin resistance right if they were
looking at the glucose like so many do
you're just going to miss a lot of
people yeah it's quite hard to I think
there's different criteria right for how
one defines someone as insulin resistant
well yeah and that's just that's right
that's because there's not enough
training which is at the beginning of
the conversation you asked my mission
one of my missions is to help people
learn what to look for what do they need
to be looking for yeah they need to be
looking at insulin so is that easy to
measure well it is technically easy to
measure it's just that we have we don't
have enough systems in place to allow to
enable it like again um if if someone
listening in the UK were to go to their
GP and say can you measure my insulin in
many instances they literally can't get
it done the system just isn't in place
to take it to the lab and and measure it
now some do I know some physicians in
the UK who do so and they have developed
their own way of getting it done and
they're incredible Advocates of this
whole idea but it is harder in the UK in
Canada um where the system is such that
they have said out of ignorance but
perhaps well placed or or well
intentioned they will say well insulin
isn't a marker that matters it is and if
you're measuring insulin resistance just
to put things back to where we had
talked about it earlier many people with
insulin resistance have normal blood
glucose levels it's the insulin that's
high and so I would say if a person can
get their insulin measured get it
measured in US units if it is anything
above about 10 Micro units per M that's
a warning in UK units if it's anything
above about 40 picamoles that's a
warning insulin is high you could have
insulin resistance and you could be
skinny oh yes and have insulin
resistance yes that's especially
depending on the ethnic
like if someone listening to this is
East Asian and they say well I'm quite
thin I don't have insulin resistance you
very well could um it it depends even in
in young women a a group out of Northern
Canada which is of course pretty far
north they found that even in young
healthy weight women with
PCOS they if they compared them to their
identically matched other women without
PCOS they were more insulin resistant
than the other group so so anyway that's
my way of saying
even if you look at yourself and think
well I'm kind of lean I'm not instant
resistant you very well could be okay so
I've got a friend who's a woman MH who
has PCOS yeah and one of the things that
she often says to me is that she gains
weight easily is this true oh for sure
and in fact I wouldn't be surprised if
she does because the fact that she has
PCOS is not absolute evidence but very
likely evidence that she has insulin
resistance which would mean at any given
moment her insulin is at the risk of
being a little higher than her
noninsulin resistant counterparts so if
she goes and gets the test done I bet
her insulin would be High um and so all
that would mean is which is good I mean
knowledge is power and my hope would be
that as someone goes and gets their
insulin measured and there are a handful
of other tests they could also look at
but that's the most succinct then it
would be all the more impetus or
encouragement to say okay I heard I
listened to step and Ben I really do
need to start making some Chang
and even in
PCOS there are reports that document the
absolute reversal of the disease with
nothing more than just dietary changes I
was looking also a second ago because we
mentioned ethnicity a few times and it
says the research I was looking at says
that East Asians have East Asians have
fewer fat cells and they're more
resistant to obesity related metabolic
issues well that's second part of that
statement is is not true they are more
resistant to obesity but they are like
if it's an interesting dichotomy I got
you yeah so they're you like to find a
Japanese man who's as fat as the average
American boy you're going to have to
look it's hard it's hard but to find a
Japanese man who has is just as much
likely to get diabetes type two diabetes
very easy Africans have more fat cells
typically yeah so so on that ethnicity
if now there's a lot of kind of wiggle
room here but on one end we'd have
Caucasians blacks would be right nearby
African ethnicities would be quite close
um to the to the kind of northern
European ethnicity and then we would
move through and and I don't mean to
miss anyone here but on the other end it
would be East Asian and then sprinkled
through that would be um uh Latino
Latino would be somewhere in the middle
kind Hispanic and then other Southeast
Asian and then East Asian kind of on the
worst end or the least sensitive or the
most resp sensitive to their fat the
most sensitive to their fat this
actually is a concept that has been
presented called the personal fat
threshold which is this really
interesting idea born from a group in
Australia suggesting that across every
individual body which of course is
heavily influenced by both ethnicity and
sex like we' mentioned earlier a body is
going to have a rate at which it can
store fat in a healthy way and then once
that threshold is met any further
pressure to store fat will start
creating insulin resistance and that
threshold is essentially how big how how
many fat cells do you have and how much
room do they have so if you have more
fat cells you have a higher fat
threshold you can get fatter before it
starts to hurt you does your fat
distribution also matter here because it
does different races this research is
telling me have different fat
distribution it's saying that Africans
have better fat distribution lower
visceral fat and less metabolic risk
because of that yeah yeah yeah Caucasian
moderate fat cell quantity more prone to
subcon Fat accumulation subcutaneous
which is that's the fat around the orans
yes so Caucasians so so let's say
northern European African both store
more of their fat subcutaneously which
is the fat just beneath the skin or the
fat that you can pinch and jiggle that
has an ability to expand more because
there's nothing really to limit it um
however the other place for people to
store fat is their visceral atopos which
is the fat that is tucked within the
abdominal cavity so tucked around the
organs it's sort of surrounding the
kidneys and the intestines and the liver
that is an unhealthy place to gain fat
but in East Asian all things equal is
putting much more fat there than they
are subcutaneously the advantage of
subcutaneous fat is which is the fat on
the outside yeah yeah so the the fat
benath the skin yeah yeah the loose
belly fat the fat that can pinch and
jiggle that fat has a greater ability to
make new fat cells so as much as earlier
you and I said fat cells remain static
for the most part they do there's a
little bit of wiggle room where it can
go up and that's purely subcutaneous and
Hispanics have higher fat cell quantity
more visceral fat yes and increased risk
of obesity related conditions and so the
problem with visceral fat is this is
such a finite space there's so little
room within the core of your body that
if we allow those fats to multiply it
could theoretically start physically
compressing on tissues right and so
those fat cells only grow through
hypertrophy which is the thing we talked
about earlier with slow insulin
resistance subcut cutaneous fat cells
are more abundant but smaller visceral
fat cells are fewer but much larger and
so any ethnicity including Hispanic or
Asian that promotes relatively more fat
storage in the visceral space is going
to suffer from the consequences of that
fat much sooner and again it still comes
back to size the bigger the fat cell the
sicker the fat cell according to
Alzheimer's disease International the
total number of people living with
dementia globally is expected to reach
139 Million by 20 50 which is up from
around 55 million in 2020 which I
imagine is in part related to people
living a bit longer they once did as
well although although the past few
years life expectancy actually turned
down for the first time in the history
of modern world so who knows if it will
continue to go up but yeah it could be
people are living longer I mean one of
the effects of modern medicine is that
people live longer with
disease um Alzheimer's included but it's
absolutely a consequence further of our
overall metabolic milu that we put
ourselves in a position where we are
making our brains insulin resistant and
thus they're going hungrier and hungrier
there's a study you talk about um which
you've cited before that shows that if
you move visceral fat from an obese
animal to a lean animal this immediately
caused insulin resistance yeah in the
animal that received it okay yeah so
just to be clear if if if we took what
they did in the study just just to
reflect why or that different Depot of
fat are harmful and so the the human
body has two distinct fat Depot and you
and I described them subcutaneous which
is the fat beneath the skin or visceral
which is the fat tucked within the
organs of the abdominal space and if you
move subcutaneous fat which is like the
belly fat the belly fat and and from one
animal to another you couldn't do this
in humans if you move belly fat if you
will or subcutaneous fat from one animal
to the other the animal is very healthy
it's no problem subcutaneous fat is
inert it really is just sort of hanging
out there and minding its own business
but in that same study if you move the
visceral atap POS over now all of a
sudden that animal that got that extra
dose of visceral fat is going to become
sicker it's going to become more insulin
resistant and diabetic because you've
increased its visceral fat the amount of
fat that it has in that space the body
wants to limit the amount of fat that it
has there because if the fat again if
the fat grows too much you can
physically start compressing and
squishing organs that you need to be
functioning like the kidneys and the
intestines have you seen Brian Johnson I
have I don't know him personally but
you've seen the documentaries and stuff
made about him and the the work that
he's doing what do you make of what he's
doing to extend his age because you know
one of the subjects I think is linked to
this is the idea of longevity yeah and
aging and he's become a bit of a poster
child for the subjetive longevity right
right well I want to address this
because this is a real person so I want
to address it very politely and
diplomatically I think that I want to
distinguish the difference between
longevity research and science which is
a very real living breathing field and
I'm proud to know individuals who are
longevity scientists and distinguish
them from um longevity you said poster
child so the the gurus of longevity and
that's not the same thing so what I say
I don't mean to it to be an indictment
of longevity research but I don't mind
if people hear a bit of an indictment in
my voice of
the modern longevity Guru approach so
these individuals and he is certainly
the most um wellknown they do have the
advantage of never really being able to
be proven wrong you know so there's an
inherent problem here but I will say
that the the application of being a
longevity um expert or not a scientist
but a guru and I don't mean for that to
be negative but it does have a bit of a
negative sound to it is that you have to
rely on what I would call weak evidence
now what do I mean by
that uh so all of the approaches to
longevity nowadays rely on either
correlational studies or basic research
or animals and insect studies and then
extrapolating that results or assuming
those same results will apply to the
human so let me briefly just mention my
concerns with correlational research so
the longevity Guru will
say correlational evidence suggests that
people who eat meat
um die more well a correlational study
is by my estimation some of the weakest
evidence that you can ever generate a
correlational study would just have
someone come to your home and say
Stephen can you please answer this
survey about what you eat you answered
the survey you may lie you may not
remember you may have things that you
don't even think about including like
for example that you're part of a very
um well put together religious
organization and I actually use that
example very deliberately because people
who are known to be part of good tight
Social Circles like a formal religious
group always live longer than people who
don't maybe you're really lonely
loneliness is a greater contributor to
death than cigarette smoking and it's
not even close so there could be things
on that survey that you just cannot
capture and yet we end up making a
conclusion and so all of that
correlational evidence is deeply flawed
research and yet that becomes the basis
for the long longevity Guru to determine
diet so if I'm trying to extend my
longevity yeah trying to live longer
then exactly what should I be thinking
about yeah so my view on longevity is a
metabolic view no surprise I am a
metabolic scientist and I don't mind
someone sort of smirking at me declaring
that or admitting it but I'm somewhat
Justified just by way of setting the
stage the earliest the birth of the
modern longevity
research uh at if if it didn't start it
was heavily influenced by the work of a
woman named Cynthia Cynthia Kenyan k n y
o n Cynthia kenion was one of the kind
of she really did in my mind kind of
give give birth to the modern longevity
Focus what her lab found using an insect
model and this is again a problem with
the longevity gurus is that they rely on
insect data um for example but it was
compelling what she found I think it was
worms she found in worms that if they
restricted the glucose that the worms
were eating they would live 50% longer
or some some fantastic increase in the
how long the animals lived that kind of
gave birth to the idea of fasting being
beneficial but it also allowed her lab
to start playing around with some of the
genes of these little insects and when
they started knocking down or
underexpressing some of the genes
involved in
insulin they didn't have to restrict the
food the animals just lived longer and
so that touches on this metabolic aspect
and everyone nowadays is really
interested in autophagy autophagy is a
term for a cell essentially cleaning
itself out which is typically associated
with long fasting yeah that's yeah yeah
in fact yes so that is partly why
fasting has been so embraced within the
F longevity Community it's because if
you can promote longevity or autophagy
rather if you can promote autophagy the
cell keeping itself CLE cleaned out that
is thought to be a key contributor to
longevity so autophagy equating to
longevity I don't disagree with that I
think that probably is a very valid view
then the question comes well how can I
control autophagy well there is a humble
hormone that comes from the pancreas
that has a very powerful effect on
autophagy called insulin so as much as
people are fasting what's the value of
fasting in reducing autophagy it's
because insulin comes down now what
becomes interesting is what happens if
you were to put someone allow them to
eat calories but the calories are such
that they're insulin is staying low and
they're making ketones in other words a
ketogenic diet you also enable autophagy
there was a very welldone animal study
finding that they didn't have to
restrict calories and fast the animals
they could let the animals eat as much
as they wanted but it was a ketogenic
diet they lived significantly longer
than their other litter mates that were
eating the normal high carb Chow similar
to what humans eat nowadays and so
autophagy probably does matter for
longevity all the more reason to keep
your insulin in check because insulin is
a powerful inhibitor of autophagy so as
much as we have longevity gurus who are
taking thousands of dollars worth of
supplements I can't help but look at
that and think just control your insulin
that within every cell there's this
battle there's a yin-yang of growth and
death or building and breaking to say it
a little more politely in fact that is
metabolism the very word metabolism
encompasses anabolism which is anabolic
or building up and catabolism or
catabolic which is breaking down the key
to a healthy growing living cell is this
nice ongoing balance of build and break
build and break you have to build
something up and then modestly break it
down and then you build some things up
again and autophagy is a very important
part of that breaking cycle within the
cell that hey it's time to get rid of
some old parts and now we'll rebuild
some of that again now we're going to
break down these parts and rebuild it
insulin is the key to that process if
insulin stays high for two long you
never allow the catabolic or the
breakdown this is one reason why insulin
is so facilitative to cancer insulin
wants things to grow cancer is a disease
of growth we don't ever let the cancer
start to break down insulin won't L it
in part you've um repeatedly talked
about ketosis ketones we'll eventually
get there we're kind of teasing the
audience a little bit yeah we are yeah
but rightly so I mean ketones are a very
vilified misunderstood part of the body
and to my great Delight um it's getting
it's getting a sort of new appreciation
well I'm currently on the keto diet as
well so I am incredibly interested to
understand a like what's going on in my
body but be I I'm quite compelled by
both the pros and cons of doing it and I
want to talk about the cons and the pros
um because they both exist one thing you
say in your book why we get sick is that
the longest living humans are also the
most insulin sensitive yeah so you're
telling me that the longest living
humans are the ones that are able to
Stave off that insulin resistance yes
yes so there are keep their insulin
levels lower that's right yeah in fact
most of the longevity research was sort
of a final point on this um is that when
you look at these studies that look back
in time and say okay what is it about
these people what variables tend to go
along with the longest lived humans one
of them is that they're insulin
sensitive and their blood glucose levels
are in fact a very well done study just
last year out of Sweden I think it was
just one year ago they looked at all and
Sweden is meticulous in its in its
recordkeeping which is an advantage and
and fairly homogeneous society so it
kind of eliminates some confounding
variables but they attempted to document
what the what were the variables that
were just the most consistent theme of
people who lived very long one of them
was good glucose control and this next
one is very controversial because they
found that they also the longest lived
people had high cholesterol levels and
isn't that funny it is one of the most
consistent themes of longevity research
that the longest lived people have
higher cholesterol and yet we live in a
world that hates cholesterol and the
moment cholesterol goes up we put them
on a cholesterol lowering medication we
could be doing the perfectly wrong thing
to to help these people live longer so
that was and and then low uric acid and
there's a handful of other little
variables that fit into this sorry they
found that some of the longest living
humans had high cholesterol levels
that's right that's what the Sweden
study found for example the paper just
published a year or so ago what were
some of the most consistent themes they
had good glucose control and high
cholesterol I'm a great defender of of
cholesterol it is a molecule of
life and and so many so much depends on
on it mitochondria for example
mitochondria have to have a cholesterol
molecule in them in order to work like
the very Powerhouse of the cell and the
more you lower cholesterol through say
drug interventions the more you
compromise the
mitochondria um the sex hormones all sex
hormones are built on cholesterol it's
no surprise if someone takes a
cholesterol lowering medication their
sex hormones go down this is why some
men experience such terrible loss of
libido because he's becoming low
testosterone because of the war on
cholesterol but there good and bad
cholesterol right well that's as The
Story Goes yes and yet I think that's
overly simplified um where people will
say LDL cholesterol is the bad
cholesterol and yet that gets included
in these studies of longevity so I I
think the good and bad aspect of it is
not entirely fair or accurate we need
LDL and LDL is just as much a component
of the immune system LDL actually helps
the body fight infections so it's also
an unsung hero of immunity
there is research suggesting that in
very old age high cholesterol levels do
not always correlate with higher
mortality and in some studies may even
be linked to longer life exactly which
is bizarre yeah well you say that and
yet maybe our anti-cholesterol view is
the bizarre one yeah and so as a cynic
who's very familiar with biomedical
research I sometimes will look at
clinical markers and say why are we so
obsessed with glucose why not insulin
why are we so obsessed with cholesterol
why not triglycerides which is another
lipid that can be measured that is far
more predictive of who's going to have a
heart attack or not and I think it's
because we have chosen markers in modern
medicine that we have well-designed
drugs so it's a really really good way
to sell a lot of drugs so there's no
drug that's going to address insulin so
let's not measure it but there are lots
of drugs that will lower glucose so
let's measure glucose because then we
can diagnose the problem and then we can
give them a drug and make a lot of money
that's a cynical view but I don't think
it's unjustified similarly with
cholesterol why look at LDL when
triglycerides another lipid marker are a
much better indicator it's because we
don't have a drug that effectively
lowers triglycerides you can with diet
but we do have drugs that very
effectively lower
LDL one thing that really surprised me
when I was reading your work is there
was a study done in Bulgaria which
proved that smoking causes in insulin
resistance in humans by having seven
healthy nonsmokers smoke four cigarettes
over an hour for 3 days what did they
find in that study yeah so they found
that if you took healthy non-smoking
people and had them start smoking they
became insulin resistant I believe I
invoked that study in the section where
I was talking about
inflammation um where when you cigarett
smoke that elicits there's a lot of junk
coming in and there's a powerful
inflammatory response and that
contributes to insulin resistance is
this vaping as well oh so that is a very
good question I have in fact published
now multiple papers with a very good
friend and colleague who is a lung
expert at my University a guy by the
name of Paul Reynolds Paul and I we have
published reports together looking at
cigarette smoking and the inflamatory
and insulin resistance effects that come
from that and now we've even started
looking at the molecules the hyper
heated molecules from vaping and they're
they're terrible in fact yes very
similar results
if you were to take a comparable amount
of the chemicals from normal cigarette
smoke with its filter versus vaping The
Vaping ones are probably worse chemical
for
chemical in terms of their insulin yeah
in terms of their inflammatory effect
the damage to the airway and the insulin
resistance that comes from it that's
horrifying it is in part because of just
how common it's
become does smoking make us fat Ah
that's a a great question it doesn't
because it replaces other interests so
if the cigarette smoker ate the way
everyone else was eating it would but
because the cigarette smoke satisfies a
craving they have less of an interest in
food what's so interesting about
cigarette smoking is again as I said you
begin to smoke other things don't tempt
you as much like the cookies and the
cakes but one of the ways the smoker
helps kick the habit of cigarette
smoking is actually eating candy like
will literally start carrying around
little candies in their pocket so that
they feel a craving for cigarette
smoking they will take out a little
candy open it up and pop it in their
mouth and so it's no surprise that very
commonly when a person quits smoking
they gain significant weight they end up
trading out their addictions if you will
um and unfortunately in humans all of
the study of addictions with food people
only manifest an addiction to one type
of food and that is carbohydrate there's
no evidence of addiction to fats or
proteins you published a study in 2024
which found that exposure to De diesel
exhaust gas was associated with
increased fat Mass yeah enlarged fat
cells insulin resistance and increased
levels of inflammation and that was
published in the international Journal
of molecular Sciences yeah that was one
of the studies I just was referring to
with regards to my colleague Paul
Reynolds Paul and I we that was one of
the papers we published looking at these
inhaled particulates the reason I was
interested in this field of study in the
first place was just to continue
continue to kill the caloric model of
obesity so our and this touches on an
earlier part of the conversation
overwhelmingly if you ask someone why do
we get fat well because you eat more
calories than you burn why do you lose
fat because you eat fewer calories and I
have long just been frustrated by how
naive that view is Yes Energy matters
but again the fat cell must be told what
to do with the energy that it has that
of course points an obvious finger at
insulin which is the strongest of all
signals but what we found in that study
is that even something as seemingly
unrelated as diesel exhaust particles
mind you we did not do this study in
humans full disclosure we did the study
in animals where we could perfectly
control how much diesel exhaust they're
getting um so we have this mechanism
through in Paul's lab where you can
aerosolize these particulates and know
exactly how much the animal is breathing
and then at the end of the study after
even though they ate the exact same
amount of food the animals that were
exposed to the diesel exhaust
particulates had fatter fat cells and
more insulin resistance than the animals
that had just been breathing normal room
air so what we're breathing in
theoretically could then be determining
how fat we're getting yeah yeah in fact
yeah this evidence would suggest that it
goes beyond Theory so our evidence would
state conclusively that yes what you
breathe does matter then theoretically
we would say well how much does that
apply to humans that is where it would
get into the realm of theoretical but
the evidence certainly suggests yes the
very air we breathe matters and you see
this at a popul level look in areas
where there are now there are
confounding variables here here I am
invoking correlational research and I
was just criticizing at a moment ago
with regards to longevity but you look
in areas where they have higher
pollution levels where the particulates
are higher in the atmosphere and those
same areas are always fatter and more
diabetic
interesting but but of course that's
correlational so it's hard exactly yes
thank you for pointing it out and but
again as much as you and I are citing
the problem with the correlational study
there we need to always cite the problem
with correlational studies when it comes
to informing nutrition policy like don't
eat eggs because they cause diabetes but
when you actually look at the studies
you find nothing of the sort what about
other sort of environmental toxins and
their impact on insulin resistance MH
yeah so there are the ones that you
inhale a handful of inhaled particulates
will matter we have shown in my lab
alone with my with my collaborators
diesel exhaust will do it cigarette
smoke will do it and more we a funded
Grant right now to look at the effects
of vaping so apparently stuff we breathe
will matter to some unknown degree
things that we drink will that are
non-caloric so there can be like people
have heard of the
microplastics microplastics are things
that you can they are so small that you
drink them and they will absorb through
the intestine and get into the
bloodstream for reasons that are unknown
to me at the moment one of the sites
where those micro particles will go is
the fat cells and once there they will
directly promote the growth of the fat
cells so that's actual microscopic
segments of plastic but separate from
that are molecules that can come from
Plastics and soaps and detergents like
BPA or diethyl sbol Dees that's actually
an estrogen mimetic kind of what we
referred to earlier with regards to
other endocrine disruptors but there are
other chemicals that a person can drink
um or inhale like mentioned earlier but
that will directly impact the growth of
fat cells or promote to tell mimic what
insulin wanted to do which is tell the
fat cell to
grow I've invested more than a million
pounds into this company Perfect Ted and
they're also a sponsor of this podcast I
switched over to using matcha as my
dominant energy source and that's where
perfect Ted comes in they have the
matcha powders they have the matcha
drinks they have the pods and all of
this keeps me focused throughout a very
very long recording day no matter what's
going on and their team is obsessed with
quality which is why they Source their
ceremonial grade matcha from Japan so
when people say to me that they don't
like the taste of matcha I'm guessing
that they haven't tried perfect Ted
unlike lowquality matcher that has a
bitter grassy taste perfect Ted is
smooth and naturally sweet and without
knowing it you're probably a perfect
head customer already if you're getting
your match at places like blank Street
or Joe and the juice but now you can
make it yourself at home so give it a
try and we'll see if you still don't
like matcha so here's what I'm going to
do I'm going to give you 40% off our mat
match if you try it today head to
perfect ted.com and use code st40 or if
you're in a supermarket you can get it
at tesos or Holland and Barett or in the
Netherlands at Albert Hine and those of
you in the US you can get it on Amazon
as you guys know whoop is one of my show
sponsors it's also a company that I have
invested in and it's one that you guys
asked me about a lot the biggest
question I get asked is why I use whoop
over other wearable technology options
and there is a bunch of reasons but I
think it really comes down to the most
overlooked yet crucial feature it's
noninvasive nature when everything in
life seems to be competing for my
attention I turn to whoop because it
doesn't have a screen and will armed the
CEO who came on this podcast told me the
reason that there's no screen because
screens equal distraction so when I'm in
meetings or I'm at the gym my whoop
doesn't demand my attention it's there
in the background constantly pulling
data and insights from my body that are
ready for when I need them if you've
been thinking about joining whoop you
can head to join. whoop.com CE
and try whoop for 30 days risk-free and
zero commitment that's join. whoop.com
CEO let me know how you get
on so let's talk about ketosis and
ketones um the diet the keto diet is
becoming increasingly popular from what
I've seen it's actually the diet that
I'm on at the
moment how does that play into
everything we've talked about yeah yeah
so it it this is an opportunity for me
to do a little bit of um B nutrient
biochemistry or a little discussion of
metabolism so that people appreciate
what ketones even are and where they
come from so the the entirety of the
human body is a metabolic hybrid in that
the body is largely burning fuel from
two sources it is burning blood glucose
or sugar blood sugar or it's burning fat
those are the two main fuels for the
body my extension now the brain was an
exception the brain is glucose or
ketones and but I'll get to where the
ketones come from the rest of the body
isn't really relying on ketones as much
it's fats or glucose or blood sugar
insulin is what decides which fuel is
used so as much as the metabolic engine
has two fuel sources insulin will decide
which one is opened and which one is
closed if insulin is high the body is
sugar burning and you can measure this
in the whole body level by measuring the
amount of O uh oxygen and CO2 that the
body is producing because different
biochemistry or the burning of the fuels
will produce a different amount of CO2
so if I'm burning glucose I might be
producing more CO2 yes yeah so we could
hook you up to something called an
indirect calorimeter and measure that
your reer the respiratory exchange ratio
the balance between CO2 and oxygen would
go higher so we we increase your insulin
like if I infused you with insulin in
the next few minutes we would see that
your reer would go up and we' say boy
you're sugar burning or we allow insulin
to come down and then the re R goes down
which is reflective of fat burning so
it's insulin that determines whether the
body is sugar burning or fat burning now
when insulin has been low for about 16
or so
hours something interesting starts
happening at the liver so the liver with
insulin being low is burning a lot of
fat including its own fat that the liver
can store the liver can store fat but
also fat coming from fat cells because
if insulin is low the fat cells are just
leaking out fat to be burned by the body
and because insulin is low the liver
keeps burning it and the liver
essentially Burns continues to burn so
much fat that it it fills its own needs
it meets its own needs and says to
itself hey I don't need to keep burning
fat I have all the energy I need I'm I'm
doing great but it can't stop burning
fat because insulin is low and if
insulin stays low fat burning keeps
going and so because the body doesn't
have enough glucose well it's acting yes
so in this sense it's doing it to help
replace the glucose that isn't coming in
that's the value of the Ketone so as the
liver is continuing to burn fat it
essentially gets to a point of fat
burning where it's burning more fat than
it needs and that excess if you will is
what becomes ketones so ketones are kind
of a metabolic release valve for the
liver cell to say I I can't I don't know
what to do with all this fat burning
okay I know what I'm going to do there's
not a lot of glucose coming in and so
the brain may start to get hungry so I'm
going to start making ketones
and so ketones are nothing more than a
product of a lot of fat burning and
anyone who even fasts for 24 hours you
wake up that next morning you're in some
degree of ketosis lest anyone think it's
an extreme thing people are going in and
out of ketosis ideally often now why do
I say ideally it's because ketones are
as we've already outlined perhaps the
best fuel for the brain the brain
thrives on ketones you can take a person
with early stage Alzheimer's disease and
have them go through a series of
cognitive tests and they do horribly on
them like one example is you ask the
patient with Alzheimer's to draw the
face of an analog clock a circle with 1
two through 12 and then some hands on it
and it is utter chaos this is published
reports you then put them into
ketosis ask them can you please draw the
face of a clock it's still sloppy but it
is absolutely the face of a clock you
ask them when they're not in ketosis to
try to tie their shoelaces they can't
think through the puzzle of tying the
shoelaces ask them to do it again when
they're in ketosis all of a sudden they
can tie their shoelaces more than that
they can get themselves dressed all of
these are published case reports it's
just my long-winded way of saying the
brain thrives when it has ketones as a
fuel source but the benefits don't stop
there my lab published a report finding
that when humans were in ketosis which
is just a term term for ketones being
elevated we pulled out small pieces of
belly fat and measured the metabolic
rate of that belly fat and we found that
in ketosis the metabolic rate of that
belly fat was three times higher than
when the people were not in ketosis what
does that mean yeah so that means that
the fat was suddenly behaving in a much
more energetic way that fat tissue has a
very low metabolic rate and then all of
a sudden when the ketones came into them
they started getting much more active
and they started burning more energy
which is going to be very helpful for
someone who wants to lose fat if your
fat cells now have a three times higher
metabolic rate that means that the fat
cells are starting to act a little bit
more like your muscle cells and they're
just burning more energy so does that
mean that I'm going to lose fat faster
what do that mean absolutely and that is
what happens there are very well done
controlled studies to show that if you
control for all calories when a human is
in ketosis their metabolic rate goes up
your body your whole body is just burn
more um it it's just everything's kind
of been turned on a little more the the
the the furnace of the metabolism has
just been it's have a little more fuel
kind of stoking the fire so ketones will
increase metabolic rate of fat tissue we
found a paper that we published
documenting how we took muscle cells and
kind of insulted the muscle cells to
determine how tough the muscle cells
were when we incubated the muscle cells
with ketones they were much more
resistant to injury so the the ketones
act to protect muscle tissue and in a
way that is reflective of a function of
ketones ketones are a defender of muscle
ketones are basically the way to tell
the brain saying brain you think you
need a lot of glucose and if you don't
get enough glucose you would start
stripping the protein from muscle to
turn it into glucose but I'm here as a
ketone so you can eat me instead and not
and leave the muscle alone so we
published again a direct report finding
that ketones actually make Muscle more
resistant to injury and this could be
why you're seeing more and more Elite
athletes using ketones as an actual
ergogenic Aid or like a supplement to
help them better be better so at my
University at BYU just this year our
men's and women's cross country team
took the national championships the best
college runners in the nation pretty
impressive one of the things they do is
they take these Ketone drinks before
they train and before they they race
some more and more of the Torrance teams
take Ketone supplements because it is
just another fuel it is something that
the body can burn that that we always
say well if once you start running out
of glucose you're going to Bonk or
you're going to hit the wall well what
if you don't really use glucose because
you're burning a lot of fat and a lot of
ketones instead and that keeps your
glucose kind of untouched or you're not
you're not relying on the GL and we see
this in humans if there's a human that
is adapted to a ketogenic diet they they
burn fat at a higher rate than was ever
thought humanly possible that that fat
is basically fueling all of their muscle
movement during the exercise session
rather than relying predominantly on
glucose the body has adapted it's
burning fat for fuel and when available
it's burning ketones for fuel and it's
leaving the muscle as sort of a last
resort when it really needs a big kick
I've seen these keto drinks little
they're almost like little shots well
there's a bunch of different types if
you look at the Spectrum ketones you on
one end you have the cheapest most
readily available although less
effective called Ketone salt where it
takes a molecule of Ketone and binds it
to a mineral like calcium or magnesium
um not as effective and it's a lot of
mineral so people will find that they
might get a lot of plaque on their teeth
yeah maybe increase risk of kidney
stones so comes with some consequences
then you have the Ketone Ester which
often comes in shots yeah then you have
the bioidentical BHB or the bioidentical
Ketone one company which is original
Ketone um they make it now these ones
are more effective you take a little bit
of these and you will get an increase in
ketones they're a little more expensive
too but as the space is becoming more
competitive the price is coming down and
what exactly does it do so if I took a
shot of bi identical Ketone drink what
would go on in my body and how would I
how would that impact my cognitive
performance or athletic performance yeah
yeah so it would result so you're
drinking it in you're immediately
absorbing it from your gut yeah so if
you were not in ketosis let's say you
had and I'm not encouraging people to do
this you had just eaten two bagels and a
cup of sugary coffee you're no ketones
undetectable because insulin has come up
it's inhibited Ketone production and
then you drink a shot of the Ketone
within an hour we would detect your
ketones they would have gone up maybe to
one Miller which is a pretty significant
bump yeah and they're capable of that
kind of movement and maybe you do so
because you're thinking I really need to
be sharp right now would that make me
sharper well that's where we have to
speculate there's no I my lab published
animal evidence suggesting that yes
indeed it makes you sharper that we had
these animals navigate mazes and
recognize objects and when the animals
were on a ketogenic diet they were much
sharper they were much quickly much
better at solving problems and
remembering solutions to previous
problems it's one of the I ask this in
particular because as my team know
because I've said it to them a lot over
the last couple of weeks since I've been
on the keto diet and I've been literally
pricking my finger to check
yeah my keto levels and the highest I've
gotten to is like 2.5 which is high is
it high that's not problematic right I
mean that is just proof positive that
you're in ketosis which itself is proof
positive that you're burning a lot of
fat yeah and three that your insulin
levels are low not dropped off my body
like I've never seen in my life exactly
yeah it's crazy so the power there is
like if you'll allow me to kind of
springboard off of that comment the
power of so so if someone is listening
to this and they're thinking okay I need
to shrink my fat cells yeah
unfortunately they don't realize that
there's two variables to what caused
their fat cells to grow in the first
place they have no awareness of the
value of insulin in this in this um um
formula all they do is pay attention to
the calories and so the average
individual is looking down the road of
this fat cell shrinking journey and
they're thinking okay what I have to do
is just cut my calories and what do they
do to cut their calories they do the
exact wrong thing and before I even
answer that let me just present the
scenario let's imagine that step and I
everyone listening is invited Steven and
I are hosting a buffet we have the
world's best chefs it is going to be a
table filled with the most delicious
foods you can imagine you're in our
invitation we say come hungry because
you're going to want to try a little bit
of everything everyone listening ask
yourselves what would you do to come as
hungry as possible you'd probably do two
things or think how did you go to your
Thanksgiving or your your Christmas
dinner as hungry as possible you would
eat a little Less in some period of time
before the event and you would exercise
a little more and it would work you
would be very hungry that's why the
traditional advice given for weight loss
doesn't work because we tell people eat
less exercise more sure you may be lose
a little bit of weight in the short term
but all that does you've given them the
perfect recipe to promote hunger and
hunger always wins as a good example uh
in the US we have a game show maybe
there was some version of this in the UK
called The Biggest Loser it was
essentially who can lose the most weight
and it was through a punishing Regiment
of caloric restriction eat less exercise
more that is like the perfect embodiment
of that approach they were starving and
they were exercising to insane degrees
and oh my goodness did they lose a lot
of weight and yet you never see them
again they don't do a reunion tour 5
years or 10 years later because they
gain it all back do do you know they
gain it will they do in fact a paper
published in the US from the National
Institutes of Health doc mented not only
the degree to which they gain weight
back but also how it almost literally
breaks their metabolism that normally a
person's metabolic rate is connected to
their body mass a bigger body has a
higher metabolic rate a smaller body has
a lower metabolic rate this is just
human physiology and no surprise when
someone loses weight there's less of
body and so metabolic rate goes down as
they gain weight back metabolic rate
will typically go back up as well except
for the contestants and The Biggest
Loser they started with a high metabolic
rate because of a high body fat level
they lost a substantial amount of weight
no surprise metabolic rate went down
substantially but it this is such a
dramatic change that as they started
gaining weight back metabolic rate did
not come back with it it stayed lower
than it should have normally it's
connected sort of one to one wherever
body weight is going metabolic rate is
going except in these people that method
of dramatic weight loss through such
severe restriction which is based purely
on the caloric theory of obesity leads
to such it leads to significant hunger
so no surprise if a person's attempting
to shrink their fat cells or lose weight
if the first step is I'm going to cut my
calories and they don't address their
High insulin they're never going to lose
weight in the long run they're going to
step right back to where they were
because if they start cutting calories
but insulin is still high that's going
to make them very hungry because insulin
wants to be storing energy
a do a professor from Harvard named
David Ludwig found this if you have
people eating a lower calorie meal that
spikes their insulin it makes them much
hungrier than a lower calorie meal that
doesn't Spike insulin so that's the key
anyone listening if you're thinking I
need to be on a fat cell shrinking
Journey let the first step of that
journey be I'm going to lower my insulin
which means which means I'm going to
control my carbohydrates I'm going to
stop eating carbohydrates that come from
bags and boxes with barcodes and while I
am restricting those carbohydrates I'm
going to focus more on protein and fat
so control carbs prioritize protein and
don't fear the fat that comes with those
proteins fat and protein together is a a
a miraculous combination of helping you
feel full and it is literally giving
everything you need there are such
things as essential proteins there are
such things as essential fats so focus
on those and that will be the key to
helping insulin come down then as you
have found you haven't and when you're
hungry eat if you're not hungry don't
eat but what the person will find as
they're lowering their insulin all while
their metabolic rate is going up they're
learning how to burn their own fat for
fuel because remember the metabolic
hybrid that metaphor that if you want to
lose fat you need to burn fat you're not
going to lose fat if you're always
burning glucose it's fat that you need
to burn and as you start burning more
fat you realize that it's like the hump
on a camel that hump exists because it
is a big source of fat for that animal
to be using its own fat for energy we
have our own version of that so where
you think about the average individual
who's chubby they have hundreds of
thousands of calories waiting to be
burned in those fat cells it's just that
their chronically elevated insulin is
never letting them burn it and so as the
person starts making these changes in
their diet to lower insulin they now can
finally start relying on their own fat
for fuel so it's no surprise that their
hunger starts to come down let that be
the natural way in which you're
controlling your calories don't control
your calories because you're forcing
yourself to be hungry and eat less
control your calories because you simply
aren't hungry so I have to I'll overlay
this with my own sort of anecdotal
experience so I every year do a keto
diet for usually for about 8 weeks M
this time it's going to go on for a
little bit longer um in the reason in
part why it's going to go on a little
bit longer so I've just learned more
about what's going on in my body and
also because I podcast now and do a lot
of speaking on stage and those kinds of
things I see tremendous variance in my
ability for my brain to articulate what
I want to say the same way it's like
it's absurd yes I I was saying this the
other night to the the team that with me
here in Los Angeles and I've tried to
say it to so many people as someone that
can spend nine hours a day trying to
think of the next question to ask or
trying to remember the research or on
stage in front of people trying to
deliver a story or a point I get to see
variants which I've never been able to
explain yeah um where some days I'll go
up on stage I'll be in a podcast and
it's like my brain and my mouth aren't
connected and then on other days
specifically when I started doing
ketosis or having a ketogenic
diet it just flows yeah it just flows so
well and I was saying to my team it
feels like I'm looking at the world like
this these days like I've got this
intense for anyone that can't see me I
just stretched my
thist focus on the the other thing I've
noticed with my diet is I I get hungry
but not like I used to get hungry and
then very quickly after I start
eating I stop mhm I don't seem to be
like doing like these I used to kind of
binge a little bit yeah I used to have
like a longer eating sessions and my
Hunger goes very quickly um I also found
that I didn't have these like
fluctuating energy levels throughout the
day I don't crash anymore I used to get
like slumps oh for sure and I don't
slump anymore and then the other thing
which a lot of people will care mostly
about is the the fat so like belly fat I
have never seen anything that has
stripped belly fat off me faster and I'm
talking in a matter of weeks that I
could you know count on one hand yeah
than doing the ketogenic diet and if I I
could literally show a picture of my
scales because I have the digital scales
on the screen and it's just trundling
along and then there's this Cliff Edge
where it goes directly down and it and
so much so actually that one of my
concerns for the ketogenic diet is how
the hell do I keep my muscle oh that's a
great question because my girlfriend to
her credit when I did ketosis the first
time she was like I've never ever seen
you look like this when I took my top
off but also it was quite clear that my
my muscles had got smaller I was lean as
but my muscles were smaller yeah so
with with with caution this time I did
ketosis again and I've been thinking how
the do I keep my muscles yeah yeah
okay so first of all let me just add a
hearty amen I'm an advocate of a
ketogenic diet although it can be
applied differently across different
people but I would say anyone would
benefit from having some modest period
of time of elevated ketones at least in
some portion of the day now how do you
maintain muscle mass in the midst of
such obvious weight loss I can only
speculate now there are peer-reviewed
studies that I can cite which do support
the idea that a human can be on
autogenic diet and have a total
maintenance of muscle and strength that
is published so we know it's possible
although that isn't that doesn't seem to
be what happened with you I would
suspect that there were two
things two things happening possibly now
I'm speculating here and I'm pretending
to be your coach or your expert here one
could have been that you had relatively
lower energy during your workouts
because of a slight degree of
dehydration and then the other one would
be calories which which I'll come back
to in a moment I just wanted to put it
out there so when insulin comes down one
of the other one of the many effects in
the body is that another hormone comes
down called aldosterone which is one
we've never invoked yet but low insulin
leads to lower aldosterone when
aldosterone comes down the kidneys
become much uh begin to eliminate salt
and water much more rapidly now that's
not problematic but it does mean that a
person does have to focus more on
hydration and salts so if someone's
going on this strategy and they exercise
fairly often you need to be much more
focused on your
hydration literally drinking more
because you will be urinating more which
is partly why people's blood pressure
gets so good so quickly and just to
pause on that point there if if someone
is on one or two blood pressure
medications and they adopt a ketogenic
diet they usually have to stop their
medications within two days because
their blood pressure goes to normal so
quickly that if they stay on the
medication they're going too low so one
could be that you were actually working
out a little less intensely because of
the
dehydration but then
two it's possible that you were eating
too few calories to actually maintain
muscle muscle is a hungry organ it is
metabolically expensive for the body to
keep that muscle on and as you start to
get leaner and leaner it gets harder and
harder for the body to defend that
muscle in fact that the difference
between fasting and starvation the
longest known evidence of a fast was a
man in the UK who fasted for 384 days
literally not eating or drinking a
single calorie he was under medical
supervision getting vitamins and
minerals and water and he was went to
live on went on to live a perfectly
healthy life um so but what was the
difference why was that not starvation
starvation is when you run out of fat so
you might have gotten to the point of so
lean that you didn't have enough fat to
burn to make enough ketones to fuel the
brain if you don't have enough fat to
burn to make enough ketones and the
brain is saying all right well I wanted
to switch to ketones so that I could
spare the
glucose but I can't there's not enough
ketones here so I have to rely 100% on
glucose but if you're not eating glucose
now the body has to start stripping the
protein from muscle and it sends those
amino acids to the liver then the liver
is so capable it will turn those Amino
acids into glucose so it turns my muscle
into glucose to feed the brain so my
comment then getting finally getting to
my answer is in your version of a
ketogenic diet with your level of muscle
mass and your inherent metabolic rate
based on your body size and your
activity you probably ought to eat more
fat I wasn't actually doing the blood
test at that point I'm doing it this
time around but I wasn't doing the blood
test so I can actually see my keto
levels yeah so maybe I wasn't even in
ketosis cuz I wasn't having you might
have been but it could have that you
were simply not eating enough calories
that I have to so this is an instance
where that's what I'm trying to do this
time I'm trying eat more fat like every
time you're making a steak put butter on
there and when you're drinking a cup of
coffee as crazy as it sounds I drink
yerba mate every morning I will put a
big dab of butter like a big dab of
butter in my tea and I'm sipping on it
while the world's still asleep and the
kids haven't woken up yet and so I know
because I want to keep my muscle as a
guy who's almost 50 um I I find that
when during my strict ketogenic phase
and I'm currently in it as well every
January I go to kind of a carnivore diet
to and I mostly do it to one lean down
but also to check any addictions and
habits I don't like feeling addicted to
things and and my wife will comment and
even as an almost 50-year-old it's fun
to see my six-pack coming I don't want
to lose my mass my muscle mass because
you have to work so hard to get it yeah
and what I find is if I increase my fat
I always get plenty of protein but if I
increase my fat content I have an easier
time maintaining my bulk are there any
downsides of following a ketogenic diet
that we need to be aware of the only
downside I can articulate so in fact I
didn't even finish because I distracted
myself mentioning some of the benefits
of ketones but ketones are further
anti-inflammatory like they directly
reduce inflammation in the body by
inhibiting inflammatory processes and
they also improve antioxidant defenses
so it helps reduce oxidative stress so
ketones do have benefits that go beyond
beond even what we've taken the time to
articulate if there's any negative to a
ketogenic
diet it could be that you
start you acutely or you temporarily
become less metabolically flexible now
that's me invoking a term we haven't
brought up yet but metabolic flexibility
is is a term to refer to the body's
ability to when it eats glucose to burn
glucose when it's not eating glucose it
burns fat so you're shifting between the
two metabolic fuels that we outlined
earlier when someone has been adhering
to a ketogenic diet for some time it's
almost as if their body is stuck in fat
burning mode and that if you and I being
in such adapted ketogenic State as we
are if we were to go to lunch and eat
two bagels and a sugary
drink it would take us a very long time
to clear that glucose from our blood um
much longer than otherwise like let's
say we go out with the production team
they're eating a normal higher carb diet
all things equal same body size same
activity their glucose levels would come
up and down in 90 minutes for perhaps
yours in mine may take 180 minutes to
come back down so the person may say
well gosh Stephen and Ben are no longer
burning glucose very well and that's
true in that one moment um our bodies
had almost forgotten what it was like to
burn a bunch of glucose because we had
adapted to fat burning so what about the
gut microbiome oh yeah CU cuz I tell
someone who is a nutritionist that I was
doing a keto diet at the moment and they
said oh you're poor gut ah yes well what
a naive um thing to say if I may gently
reprimand your friend there's no
evidence to support that there's any
harmful change in the microbiome in fact
a paper was just published that looked
at a man who went from a normal
omnivorous human diet with abundant
plant matter to a purely carnivorous
diet literally zero carb and they
documented prely no change in his
microbiome none whatsoever but is he
eating plants no well he had been eating
plants so the case study was a person
eating a normal diet of of plants and
meat a normal omnivore diet and a do and
then looked at the microbiome and then
adapted to a purely carnivorous diet
purely meat and the microbiome didn't
change at all what's the time period
months I think the problem with the
microbiome the reason I don't take
microbiome research too seriously as a
scientist is that it is a big black box
you you you came from the UK to London
uh to to to LA to California if we took
a microbiome sample analysis of your
time in the UK now it would be different
now even though you're eating the same
but you're drinking different water
you're breathing different air things I
was just on a plane from Utah to
California give me a day or so I would
have some sort of shift in my microbiome
so the microbiome can change in resp
response to all kinds of things the idea
that you somehow have decimated your
microbiome because you aren't eating
fiber is absolutely false that is that
is completely false now there might be a
change in some of the population of your
microbiome more of one less of another
but there's no evidence to suggest
that's problematic your microbiome is
intact those bacteria do not die they're
just simply metabolizing other things
maybe they're relying more on short
chain fatty acids maybe they're relying
more on amino acids they're not eating
as they're not eating fiber but there's
still stuff in the meat or the eggs that
the microbiome will eat but if if if
eating lots of plants does give me a
more diverse gut microbiome then if I
stop eating plants I'm going to have a
less diverse gut microbiome yeah but but
Stephen but even then there's a bit of
an assumption built into the question
because it's do we know that the
microbiome will be less diverse the case
study I just mentioned found that in
this one single man it didn't change his
microbiome at all
it was the exact same populations in all
the same proportions because isn't the
aren't the plants like feeding the
bacteria yeah yeah so the the fiber is
so fiber will but again it's not that's
not the only thing bacteria can eat
bacteria can eat fats bacteria can eat
amino acids they can eat glutamine for
example they um they can even meat will
have a little bit of glucose in it where
the muscle has something called glycogen
and so there's you know Trace Amounts of
glucose and even the meat that you're
eating so I do not look at the argument
that you know you're destroying your
microbiome that has no that has no
scientific support you may be changing
your microbiome but who's to say that's
a bad change maybe it's a better change
you certainly are feeling better you're
thinking better you're getting leaner
your insulin sensitivity is improved
cognition is improved I would argue if
there is a change in your microbiome
it's probably one that's for the best
and no one can prove that wrong as much
as I just stated that comment in a
speculative fashion it's speculative
because there's no evidence this is why
I look at the microbiome and just say
yeah it appears to matter but in ways
that we don't know but the the you agree
with the argument that if I sat here now
and I
ate a wide range of plants for the next
let's say six months when you analyzed
my gut microbiome it would be much more
diverse I'm not agreeing to that I don't
know if that's true um and again I would
cite that one case report I just
mentioned now which is the a man who did
this they reported that the microbiome
was identical that there was no
significant change is that that's just
one man there it was one man it was a
case report which is not a randomized
clinical study so um but even still I
with my
speculation um heavily handed here I
would say probably
more plants would result in a more
diverse
microbiome but I would say but then the
next step is a harder one which is is
that good or bad I don't know maybe all
you're doing is promoting the growth of
bacteria that make more gas because
they're fermenting the fiber and you
just have more flatulence as a result of
it people dietitians will say well a
diverse microbiome is a good microbiome
well prove it h how do we know that how
can you prove that to me as a basic
scientist I want to see the hard
evidence because what I can prove is
that we can take humans who are
overweight and diabetic and hypertensive
eating a standard American or Global
diet and put them under a ketogenic diet
which is going to be a much
simpler diet and yet every clinical
marker gets better and so if someone
were to say yeah but sure you reversed
your diabetes and your hypertension but
you're poor microbiome I would say well
I don't care about my microbiome I care
about the human and so if there's less
diversity but every single clinical
marker has gotten better perhaps more
diversity is not what we want in our
bacteria I'm and I'm speculating but s
is the person who states that yes I I'm
not aware of um research that links the
two um but I I could always have a look
but um I would I I was always under the
assumption that a more diverse
microbiome is a healthier person yeah I
don't know yeah but but do you do you
feel healthier now um feel healthier I
certainly feel and it's only been a
short amount of time so I don't know
what what my health might look like if
I'd done this for like two years right
because then there could be a really
sort of deeper change to um I know comp
for more than two years and they're
they're great because some of the some
of the changes that occur in our health
take time now you you show this a lot in
your work with insulin resistance that
if you're insulin resistance for 10
years your brain think I read in your
work is like it ages it ages by an
additional two years is that it
accelerates the aging and I wonder the
same thing with like my gut microbiome
if I'm if my gut microbiome is not
diverse so I have a very sort of um
narrow diet or you know I'm not getting
not eating my plants could it take me a
couple of years to really understand the
net negative impact that that has on my
overall health it it's entirely possible
yeah yeah I would just I would just ask
that we be careful with the assumptions
that if there is an an increase in
diversity with more plant matter that's
an if um is that change beneficial are
the bacteria that we're now promoting
the growth of are they better for us or
are they just bacteria that exist in
order to handle more fiber and again the
outcome being that perhaps it's just
making more gas um you know the more
plants you eat the more gas you have to
produce by fermenting more fiber what if
those bacteria are only existing to just
eat the fiber and not actually improve
the human host at all so
ketosis possible to live in a it's I
think one of the important points on
ketosis is when I do my blood keto test
I fluctuate wildly after I've gone for a
run my Ketone levels are super high
sometimes later at night I'm just on the
verge of ketosis sometimes um and I
think that's interesting because we
don't have to live in this necessarily
deep state of ketosis the whole time we
can
fluctuate a little bit and maybe my
thought on it is that a person would
benefit from some state of ketosis on on
a frequent basis if for no other reason
than to really give the brain a heavy
dose of just straight energy um not that
everyone needs to be as strict as
perhaps you and I are being at the
moment um but I would say the more a
person has a disorder or a disease that
benefits from ketosis the more than they
ought to focus on it like if someone has
Type 2 diabetes
if they adopt a ketogenic diet they will
be off all of their diabetes medications
in months all of them um if someone has
epilepsy if there or migraine headaches
if some of the from 19 13 I think was
the first published report on this if
there's someone who suffers from
migraines as long as they're in ketosis
they may never have another migraine
again I mean it is completely Curative
or preventative for the disorder same
with epilepsy that many forms of
epilepsy so depending on the person they
would benefit from being in ketosis
forever for everyone else who's just
sort of a normal individual who wants to
be lean and keep their brain healthy and
happy Etc I would say it's generally
prudent to just control your carbs be
mindful of the type of carbohydrate
you're eating and as I said earlier just
try to focus on the carbs that don't
come from bags and boxes with barcodes
I'm actually quite liberal in my view
when it comes to whole fruits and
vegetables I'd say eat them enjoy them
liberally but then ALS make sure you're
getting some good protein and fat
because there's no such thing as an
essential carbohydrate that sounds
controversial but humans do not need we
have no requirement for carbohydrate we
do have requirement for fat and protein
what about artificial sweetness one of
the things that I am tempted by when I'm
on a ketosis diet is like
the soda zeros of the world or the diet
sodas of the world what impact does that
have on my insulin levels Etc yeah great
question question there is such a
breadth of of diversity when it comes to
sweeteners from artificial to Natural to
another rare sugar more and more you
know these all these random I'm not
random but a very broad spectrum of
molecules that we have developed or
found that taste like sugar but don't
have the effective sugar so on on the
good end are things like that have been
shown to have no insulin effect and so
you know I appreciate everyone listening
letting me kind of stay with that as my
framework because people are going to go
on and criticize all kinds of other
things about other sweeteners and that's
just too broad that's a topic for a
whole book with regards to just insulin
on the good end where they have no
effect it would be one as common as
aspartame so like diet drinks not the
zero drinks but the diet drinks will
have aspartame as the sweetener is it a
difference there is a difference and
I'll get to that other one in a moment
so I should be having D instead of zero
well I personally
go to diet rather than zero um but
that's because Aspartame is the so
sweetener in the zero in the diet rather
and it has no effect on insulin so to
arrol sorry arrol is a little right
around Aspartame is generally a good one
but monk fruit extract Stevia and
especially allulose those are inert when
it comes to insulin you know alose
Stevia monk fruit extract um aspartame
no effect orthol no effect but ariol
that ending
o is reflective of a class of sweetener
called a sugar alcohol and that does not
mean it's alcoholic that just refers to
the actual chemical structure that puts
it in the alcohol family once you get
into the sugar alcohols you start to get
a little
problematic where ariol is a good one
enyl is generally a good one but then
you get to things like malol and manitol
and they do have an insulin effect and
what what's what kind of foods have
those yeah so often like you can get
manitol in like artificially sweetened
chocolate sometimes for reasons that I
don't know I don't know why the food
formulator puts them in some things and
not other things the the problem I
chuckle because it becomes so apparent
with some of those artificial sweeteners
like the sugar alcohols is that as you
eat them you taste it sweet in your
mouth and it doesn't have any caloric
value in the body because it stays in
the
intestines uh and this is something that
is largely unique to the sugar alcohols
where as it stays in the intestines it
starts pulling in water from the body
which starts to create a fairly
inconvenient degree of flatulence and
diarrhea and so a person will know if
they've eaten too many of those types of
sweeteners because their intestines will
tell them so so but also on that
Spectrum kind of in the middle is the
one that's in the zero drinks which is
one called sucrose and while sucrose is
generally not a problem with insulin it
is a sweetener that has been shown to
cross the bloodb brain barrier and so
the reason I avoid the zero drinks and
refer or go to the diet drinks is that
aspartame does No Such Thing aspartame
just gets divided into amino acids we
just digest it and absorb amino acids
sucralose will go can cross the bloodb
brain barrier and I don't know what it's
doing there but I don't want it there
and so I avoid the zero drinks because I
don't want that sweetener
but but personally and when I'm adhering
to this diet a diet soda is my actual
Indulgence where I want something sweet
um and yet I don't want the Metabolic
Effect of it one thing you mentioned
earlier which I've been thinking a lot
about is salt and I think a lot about
salt because I went to the doctor many
years ago and I think I was using this
like Maggie seasoning that I put on my
food and the doctor said to me that my
salt levels were too
high and I and then I've heard since
then from other people that were
actually probably not getting enough
salt in our diet yeah so I'm interested
to hear that your physician would have
said your salt is too high that is very
rare that that gets measured sodium I
think you yep they could have measured
sodium and that could have been higher
they absolutely could have it's just not
common so salt has be has earned a
terrible reputation because of a series
of studies that implicated salt
consumption as a cause of high blood
pressure and and really briefly as a as
a momentary physiology professor that is
a real effect if you and I were to go
eat salt our body for the next several
hours afterwards would retain its water
in order to balance out the salt so that
we didn't get too salty so we would
retain water in order to keep our salt
at a normal
level and so that could be reflected by
an elevated blood pressure um however
multiple huge Studies have found that if
you go to a population of humans that
have high blood pressure and you tell
them you need to cut your salt in order
to correct your blood pressure they may
at most move their blood pressure by one
or two points it has an absolutely
negligible irrelevant
effect um it's because salt is not a key
contributor to blood pressure it's
actually insulin resistance insulin
resistance will force the body to hold
on to Salt insulin resistance will force
the blood vessels to be very constricted
all of which play together to make for a
very high blood pressure so as much as
we have been telling the world that we
should be cutting back salt no we should
have been telling them to cut back on
what spikes your insulin refined
starches and sugars but with regards to
Salt it's interesting for me to note
where did that whole view come from
within the United States decades ago
there was a study that was published and
they called it the DASH diet dietary
approaches to stop hypertension Das the
DASH diet and in the DASH diet one of
the critical change ches was to tell
people to eat less
salt and when they found that when
people adopt a dash diet it's amazing
their blood pressure goes down However
unfortunately they also tell people to
do lots of other things with the DASH
diet like when they tell someone to go
on the DASH diet they also tell them to
eat less sugar and less refined starches
and sugars well it's possible indeed I
would say it's absolutely the case that
what's actually lowering their blood
pressure isn't that they cut their salt
back it's that they were cutting their
refined starches and sugars back and
it's that that had the main effect and
the cutting the salt was just some
innocent bystander but to put a fine
point on it in human studies if you have
humans cut back their salt considerably
they become insulin
resistant so take a healthy group of
humans say you need to eat less salt and
they do so if you measure them a week
later while they're adhering to this
they will be significantly more insulin
resistant than before they ever cut back
their salt it's one of the ironies of
the whole scenario where a physician may
be telling a patient with high blood
pressure you need to cut back your salt
and they end up eating less salt and yet
their their blood pre their blood
pressure gets worse it's because the
main contributor to high blood pressure
is insulin resistance and by telling
them to cut back on their salt you made
them more insulin resistant and that
whole mechanism is because one of
insulin's many many effects is to want
the body to hold on to salt in water and
so if you start cutting your salt all of
a sudden insulin says well there's
little salt coming in I need to do what
I can to retain whatever salt we do have
and so it starts retaining salt and
water more in order to try to offset the
lack of salt coming in and while insulin
is going higher and higher the body's
becoming more and more insulin
resistant so salt restriction can cause
insulin resistance in
humans you talk about four pillars
to eating in your book while we get sick
you outline these four essential pillars
to develop a strategy for maintaining
low insulin levels and combating insulin
resistance what are the four pillars yes
so when it comes to controlling insulin
resistance the key is to manage
macronutrients and the best way to
manage macronutrients is going to be a
strategy that helps lower insulin
lowering insulin is the key to both slow
insulin resistance and fast insulin
resistance so the more the strategy
lower insulin the more effective it's
going to be and there are poor there are
four pillars so the first one control
carbohydrates second prioritize protein
third don't fear fat and then fourth
after the first three have been taken
care of four frequently fast so with the
first one very briefly by control
carbohydrates I mean that it is time to
focus more on whole fruits and
vegetables eat them don't drink them and
then don't get your your carbohydrates
from bags and boxes with barcodes that
the more you're opening up a package and
getting your chips or your crackers or
your cereal or your bread the more
you're going to be spiking your glucose
and your insulin keep that on the
shelves at the grocery store focus on
whole fruits and vegetables that's going
to be the key for number one control
carbs now while you're eating fewer
carbohydrates you need to eat something
and so prioritize protein I would say
particularly animal Source protein which
is the best source of all of the amino
acids that humans need and then with
those proteins will come fat don't fear
that fat that's number three fat is very
satiating when combined with protein
when fat and protein come together we
digest it
better sometimes people will find that
if they just have a scoop of whey
protein it can be very upsetting on
their stomach it's because we're not
supposed to eat protein alone in nature
that never happens in nature protein
always comes with fat that's how we eat
it we digest it better and human Studies
have shown that when a human eats pure
protein there's some degree of muscle
growth albeit microscopically minuscule
but when we eat protein with fat we have
significantly greater muscle growth than
we do with the protein alone so that is
the three pillars that Encompass the
macronutrients or the big parts of our
diet but once a person has done that
then they are well positioned to adopt a
strategy a structured strategy of
fasting and that can be there are as
many ways to fast as there are people
who want to do it there's no right way
or wrong way my goal by invoking that
fourth principle and and I do think it
should come last once you've learned how
to eat better food your your your body
has adapted to burning its own fat for
fuel but it can take the it can take uh
intermittent fasting where it's one meal
of the day you're fasting through um it
can do where people do alternate day
fasting there are countless different
ways to do it even if I'm in ketosis
then you don't need to do it as much
because you're already lowering your
insulin so if a person's already in
ketosis in fact if a person were in
ketosis and frequently fasting um
depending on how lean they are it's
going to become extremely difficult to
retain muscle yeah so those are the four
pillars it will be an extraordinarily
effective way to address insulin
resistance but the problem as I started
at when I that I mentioned is that while
these concepts are simple that does not
mean they're easy because humans show
addiction addictive Tendencies to only
one macronutrient not fats not proteins
all of the evidence of the neurobiology
of addiction in humans points to
carbohydrates and and so as much as I
lay out this simple plan it can be
difficult and this is
why this self-discipline required is
difficult enough that it's why people
find that they have to result in you
know relying on drugs for these kinds of
things
physical activity exercise useful for
keeping
my insulin levels in check yeah yeah I'm
really glad you brought up exercise I'm
an enormous advocate of exercise the
best exercise to improve insulin
sensitivity is the one you'll do and so
if someone listening to this is an
80-year-old grandma and um if she if her
form of exercise is walking around the
street down around the block with her
girlfriends but then if someone else has
the ability to go cross country skiing
or CrossFit do it so the best exercise
is the one you'll do now having said
that the better exercise is the one that
you'll do that keeps
muscle um muscle building work is going
to be minute for minute a more effective
way of improving insulin sensitivity
than than any kind of aerobic activity
and that's because muscle is the great
consumer of
glucose um and back to the in fact not
only does muscle eat the most glucose
from the blood but it's it's also how it
eats the glucose when it's exercising so
earlier we talked about how insulin kind
of comes and knocks on the door of the
muscle cell and then the muscle cell
will open the door and allow the glucose
to come in thereby lowering blood
glucose unless the muscle is exercising
when a muscle is exercising and I'm kind
of mimicking the contraction and
relaxion relaxation of a
muscle when the muscle is exercising it
has its own way of opening those doors
so there's an insulin
independent method where the muscle cell
essentially tells insulin insulin I know
normally I have to wait for you to come
and open these doors but I'm so hungry
during this exercise that I'm not going
to wait and so the doors just open so
the Contracting muscle has its own way
to rush to pull the glucose in which
means of course that a person's going to
have an easier time controlling their
blood glucose which in turn would mean a
better time controlling insulin but the
more muscle a person has the easier it
is and this could be one of the reasons
why if you look at
longevity and look at the markers of
muscle strength versus the markers of
cardiovascular aerobic fitness the
aerobic fitness markers are terrible
predictors of longevity it's muscle and
strength that predicts longevity for
multiple reasons including just the very
Act of living and moving but also
because if you have more muscle you're
going to control your glucose better
which means you're going to control your
insulin better then you're back to these
variables that people use to predict or
what are the most accurate indicators of
longevity it's who has the best glucose
control more muscle helps that
happen there's a big debate around
whether we should be calorie restricting
and low fat diet whether we should be
calorie restricting in a moderate fat
diet or calorie restricting and a low
carb
diet what's what's your take on that
yeah I am unabashedly in favor of carb
carbohydrate restriction um I I would
say for two reasons um that one reason I
think that carbohydrates should be the
macronutrient that is most scrutinized
is because it's the one we eat the most
of 70% of all calories consumed globally
come from
carbohydrates that is the one that has
the biggest insulin effect for and
that's a problem for all the reasons
we've discussed but two carbohydrates
are not essential um this is
controversial people don't like to
acknowledge it but there is literally no
biological need that humans have for
carbohydrate um the in the United States
a report decades ago from the Department
of Agriculture looking at the needs of
human
nutrition there's a quote there and I'm
not going to get it exactly right but
I'll get it pretty close it's stated in
this document that the lower limit of
carbohydrate consumption in humans is
zero in other words there is no such
thing as an essential carbohydrate now
I'm not saying well let's not eat any of
them no
but I am saying why is that the one we
focus the most on as 70% of all calories
globally are coming from that one you're
telling me that we most of what we eat
comes from what we don't need why not
put the focus on the things we do need
there are such things as essential fatty
acids let's eat fat there are such
things as essential amino acids so let's
eat protein and make sure we get what we
need and then on any remainder of the
plate we can get some other things that
we want to nibble on like plants why
don't we just sack all this off and just
take as zek then ah yeah great question
so the the I have uh I have kept my
finger on the pulse of the whole field
of gut derived hormones which is what we
talk about with these weight loss drugs
almost since their beginning my
dissertation work was in a lab one of
the first funded labs to look at these
drugs although in the context of
diabetes and then it's blossomed into
the context in the use of obesity this
this is the class of drug GP receptor
Agonist first of all what is glp1 gp1 is
a hormone that we all make from our guts
our small intestine will make glp1 we're
making it all the time to varying
degrees some things we eat will result
in a higher glp1 sometimes it'll be a
lower glp one like for example a paper
just published a few months ago found
that if you have people eat the exact
same meal of calories but lower carb or
higher carb the lower carb version of
the meal will increase glp1 three times
higher in the blood than the high carb
version of the meal which means that
they'll feel yeah so then the B what so
what's the point who cares about glp1
one of glp 1's main effects is to tell
the brain that we're full okay so more
glp1 more satiety yeah yeah more gp1
less hunger which is very impactful in
fact I would be remiss if I didn't
mention a study that was published in
humans a while ago they took obese
humans and lean humans and had them eat
fat and found that like pure fat and
they found that the glp1 response was
the same whether you were lean or obese
you had the same amount of glp1 that
would suggest that whether you're lean
or obese both of your brains and both of
these populations will have the fat and
have the same sense of I'm full it would
because it was matched with glp1 however
when they had these same groups eat pure
carbohydrate the lean group had a robust
glp1 response big glp1 in other words
words they would eat the carbohydrate
and say I'm full cuz gp1 would tell them
so however in the obese group they ate
that exact same amount of carbohydrate
and they had an almost negligible glp1
effect they were still hungry in other
words they would eat the same amount of
carbohydrate as their lean counterpart
and then just say okay what's next I'm
still hungry and so it is prudent to
focus on glp1 glp1 is a powerful hormone
that does have an effect on human health
what I feel in to comment on is the
negative side effects because the only
thing we hear about is social media
influencers extoling the benefits and
hey I'm on this weight loss drug and
I've lost 50 pounds someone has to be
the voice that says yeah but what about
this and there are some significant but
whatabouts when it comes to these um
weight loss drugs one of them is the
loss of muscle mass or lean mass you've
mentioned a couple papers from the New
England Journal of Medicine a paper a
couple years ago from what was called
the step five trials looking at these
drugs they found that for every six
pounds of fat a person was losing on
these drugs they were losing four pounds
of fat-free mass or lean mass so 40% of
the weight they were losing uh on these
drugs is coming from lean mass like
including muscle and bone so there are
now case reports of young healthy women
who were overweight who go on the drug
for some period of time and after they
get diagnosed with
osteoporosis where they have eroded
their bone health they're losing lean
mass so again they've eroded their bone
health yeah so 40% of the weight that
people are losing on these drugs appears
to at these high doses is coming from
lean mass so fat-free Mass including
muscle and bone the reason I find that
so troubling is that in the UK at two
years on the drug 69% of people get off
the drug they don't want to be on it
anymore and now imagine this individual
imagine if you will a 60-year-old woman
who's been on the drug I take that age
and that sex on on purpose because it's
so hard for her to to grow new muscle
and bone let's say she's been on this
drug for a year and she's lost 20 kilos
well 40% of that will have come from her
lean mass and 60% of it came from her
fat then when she gets off the
drug now all of a sudden her lean mass
her muscle and bone that's never coming
back the muscle and bone that she has
lost is gone forever probably at that
age because we can't after the age of 60
good luck developing new muscle and bone
but what can come back rapidly is the
fat mass and so at two years she decides
to get off the drug which again about
70% of people do they're going to gain
that fat back but they're not going to
gain their muscle and bone back that is
a significant loss that may be depending
on their age gone forever I was
scrolling on Twitter the other day and I
saw a video going viral which is now
being reported in a bunch of news
Publications it was yesterday that I saw
um this video going viral and I'm going
to play this video to you it's from a
singer called Avery and she talks about
her experience with aenc I just L the
doctor's office I went to get a checkup
because I've been off of OIC for 2
months now and I just wanted to see if
my body was in better condition if there
were any permanent damages kind of in
shock right now because I wasn't
expecting this but um I guess o zumic
can cause bone density loss and I didn't
think that that would happen to me
because I was only on it for a
year um but I have significant bone loss
I have
osteoporosis and um osteopenia so that
AR there's like several of them that I
have I wasn't expecting
that but that's what happens if you
um if you use OIC uh for weight loss and
you lose too much weight yeah I wonder
she's so lean I wouldn't be surprised if
she had it even worse than normal
because we see it has become I don't
mean to suggest this is the case for her
but you do see people using these weight
loss drugs who are already very lean
I mean I've got a picture of her here
and she does look incredibly lean
already but see this is what people are
doing they're basically using it to
facilitating eating disorder in the
people who are lean um this has become
so common that there are complaints
saying that you know lean healthy people
are getting the prescription and people
who are obese and diabetic aren't
because of shortages the more the the
leaner I've seen this I know someone
personally who is already a perfectly
lean healthy woman and then she now
looks sickly
um and what caused it well she wasn't
lean enough and when you take enough of
that drug that you just have no more
hunger because of how it's acting at
your brain you do just stop eating and
the malnutrition at least in part is
going to cause a loss of lean mass um
but that also play it is even further
exacerbated by the mental health
problems where there was a paper
recently published with the use of these
drugs finding that people when they
begin the drug their risk of Suicidal
Thoughts doubles it goes up by over 100%
and their risk of major depression
triples and this so as much as we talk
about these drugs and we say the drug
helps you control your
cravings What It's hap what it's doing
is perhaps reducing your craving for
everything that while you are eating
less food which is resulting in the
weight loss you also are not interested
as much in exerc SI as you used to be
which is going to make it even easier
for you to lose your muscle and bone
you're also less interested in Hobbies
like going to play pickle ball with your
friends or going out and drinking with
the boys um so there is this kind of
what's reflected across all of their
interests is that their cravings for
everything starts to decline on the case
of that girl mentioned there Avery I've
Just Seen she's uploaded a post that
says thanks my record label told me I
was fat they dropped me I got addicted
to a Zen oh my gosh I got addicted to
his zek and now as a result I have
osteoporosis and my bones are as fragile
as wafer cookies yeah it's heartbreaking
um so now that obviously you know these
are claims that she's alleging now we
don't know the full picture of her
health and there might be something more
yeah but we do know based on that one
report that 40% of weight loss is coming
from fat-free mass and so it is in
people's best interest to be mindful of
that tendency and that if they're going
to explore the use of the drug to do so
responsibly and and I want to mention
that um kind of caveat or angle to
everything because I don't want someone
listening to me thinking all right Ben
says I should never touch this and it is
uniformly evil and bad I'm not saying
that I find that I have to speak a
little more boldly about the negative
consequences because nobody talks about
them what would she have done if she
knew about them for example no one knows
about these kinds of negatives because
people want to sweep them under the rug
now I believe there is a use case for
these drugs although different from how
it's being used currently in my mind the
best use of these drugs is to help
someone learn how to control their
carbohydrate addiction because it will
help you control your addiction sweet
Cravings goes down significantly within
six months of the person taking the drug
so I think in addition to getting proper
education and if I may be so bold I
would say it's those pillars I mentioned
earlier control carbohydrates prioritize
protein and don't Fe fat all the more
reason prioritize protein and fat to
help preserve your muscle and bone
muscle and bone are not made of
carbohydrate they're made of M of
protein and fat eat protein and fat lift
weights to keep any of that lean mass
you can keep the Integrity of your bones
intact but take advantage of the drug
helping reduce your cravings for sweet
things especially I would say find the
lowest effective dose you can where you
are able with a little bit of self
discipline where you're not assigning
all of the self-discipline to the
syringe that you're going to inject into
your tummy there is value and learning
to deny yourself something you know you
shouldn't be doing there's life lessons
to learn there and so enough of the drug
that makes it a little easier for you to
overcome your carbohydrate addiction at
the same time you're learning how to eat
well you're learning how to eat properly
by managing your macronutrients and
lifting weights and then over time
ideally I would say you find that you
are able to reduce the dose of the drug
and then eventually get off of it
entirely it's worth saying that I I did
also search to see if there was a link
between a zenek and bone density and
there was no clear Link in the studies
that have been done I I don't know
whether there's been a lot of studies
done but it says in the studies and
reviews semaglutide generally shows no
harmful effect on bone mineral density
although rapid weight loss itself can
sometimes affect bone health yeah so I
actually think it's an artifact that's a
term that we would use as a scientist to
say that it's it's an it's an effect
that's happening without being a main
effect so I don't believe the glp1 drug
is attacking the bone I think it's
because the person has just stopped
eating and stopped moving remember what
I said earlier people find that they're
just less interested in doing stuff like
going to the gym for example um and so
that is probably combining where a
little bit of malnutrition combined with
a little less physical activity means
you're accelerating some lean mass loss
one of the things that this podcast has
taught me is that
liposuction is
dangerous do you agree with that
statement I do from a metabolic
perspective I absolutely do um
liposuction is not dangerous to fit into
the clothes you want to wear but it's
deeply problematic for metabolic health
and that's because as a reminder it's
not the mass of fat we have that matters
most when it comes to metabolic Health
it's the size of our fat cells so let's
imagine an individual who has more fat
than they want in some particular part
of the body the best way to help reduce
that fat is to shrink your fat cells so
that's very important for people to
realize when you lose weight you're not
killing fat cells you're not you're not
getting rid of them you're shrinking
them and small fat cells are very
healthy fat cells they are literally
anti-inflammatory they're releasing
hormones that fight inflammation in the
body and they're very insulin sensitive
which helps the body by extension be
very insulin sensitive so very healthy
small fat cells are healthy fat cells
the problem with lipos suction is that
you are going in and rather than
shrinking the fat cells you are sucking
them out now let's say like a study that
was done in the US in women they found
that when women had lipos suction from
their buttocks and hips area um which is
where most women gain their weight which
is because of sex hormones telling her
body to store that weight there they may
look at that fat on their butt and hips
and say there's more than I want I'm
going to suck it out so they do but they
don't change their habits so they're
still eating the same way they were
before essentially now they have fewer
fat cells but the body wants to store
that same amount of fat based on how
they're eating in other words there's
enough insulin telling the body to store
a certain amount of fat and there's
enough calories to fuel that fat storage
but the the fat would be saying hey we
don't have all these fat cells in the
buttocks and hips like we used to let's
go somewhere else and so it's no
surprise that over the ensuing years
after she's had lipos section not only
does she not experience any Improvement
in any health marker nothing gets better
with regards to her health and that is
again reflective of the fact that it's
the size of the fat cell that matters
maybe she has lost 10 kilos of fat that
might be a little much for liposuction
six
kilos and you would say well you have
six kilos of less fat clearly you're
healthier and yet they're not at all
nothing has gotten better and then if
you follow them over the years they
cannot gain that fat back on their
butttocks and hips because it was
literally sucked out and adults have a
hard time making new fat cells so it's
no surprise that they start storing more
fat in an area that wasn't sucked out
namely their belly and so a woman who's
gone through lipos suction yes she will
have lost fat by lipos suction at her
butttocks and hips but if she doesn't
change her lifestyle habits the body
will take those six kilos and say well I
need to store those now somewhere else
because you're eating in a way that
makes me want to store that much fat and
so her remaining fat cells that are
intact get bigger and store a bigger
burden and so over time it's no surprise
that Health outcomes can start to get
worse by having fewer fat cells she's
increasing the burden that the remaining
fat cells have to carry not only does
that result in a dist a change in where
she's storing fat namely storing more on
her abdomen but all the fat cells will
get bigger and thus metabolic Health can
get worse we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
the last question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for and
the question that's been left for you
Ben is who in your life gave you a
chance or believed in you when no one
else
did what a fun question um thank you
um probably my wife uh frankly I just
adore her I think about so when we were
newlyweds uh we got married quite young
if you'll allow me to be a little El
personal for a moment we both really
wanted a family we knew that we wanted
to be uh mom and dad and she really
wanted to be an atome mom just full-time
mom which I loved I benefited my mother
um who died when I was quite young she
was a full-time mom and most of my
memories come from her being home when I
was would come home from lunch or I had
a tummy ache and she would come pick me
up and I I mean I thank I thank God for
my for my mother of course but also for
the time I had with her because I had so
little um and we both really wanted
Cheryl to be able to be full-time mom
mom is just that special that meant as a
young newly married husband I was
anticipating a future where I would be
the sole provider for the family and it
was very daunting
very um scary for me as a 23-year-old
that's how old I was when we got married
and I worried how am I going to provide
for my family and I would look at the
trust that my beautiful wife had in me
and I felt inadequate and I I have
moments where I remember young Ben in
his early 20s as a newlywed and how
scared I was in how my wife's ongoing
devotion put us in a position where both
make a wonderful amount of money to
provide for the family and help secure
our future and then at the same time
still have a schedule that lets me be
really home to go home early and help
one of our daughters with her
homeschooling which I do to always not
go into work until I've made breakfast
for the kids and we've had some family
time so um much of all of it is just
this the support of my wife because at
any moment if she would have said no I'm
done you got to go get a job right now I
would have I love her and respect her
enough and even rely on her Insight that
I would have done it but she just really
believed that okay Ben you're not dumb I
didn't marry you for your looks I think
you've got something I'm going to trust
you and that trust was it was both
humbling and scary but also very
empowering and it's given us a beautiful
life Ben thank you my pleasure it's been
tree ey opening and you've answered so
many of the questions that I've had for
so so long especially as it relates to
ketosis and the broader link between
insulin infertility pregnancy PCOS all
of these kinds of things which are
topics of conversation amongst my
friends and people that I love Ben thank
you my pleasure thank
you isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the Diary of
a CEO at the very end of it you'll know
I asked the guest to leave a question in
the Diary of a CEO and what we've done
is we've turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into into
these conversation cards that you can
play at home so you've got every guest
we've ever had their question and on the
back of it if you scan that QR code you
get to watch the person who answered
that question we're finally revealing
all of the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at thecon conversation
cards.com they've sold out tce twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
[Music]
h